HAND BOOK OF AGRICULTURAL
TECHNOLOGY
earch Council (BARC)
Y ture C ration Initiative (AFACT)Hand Book of Agricultural Technology
Compiled and Edited by:
Md. Abeed Hossain Chowdhury
Dr. Mian Sayeed Hassan
I= Bangladesh Agricultural Research Council (BARC)
Ws Farmgate, Dhaka-1215, Bangladesh
A Asian Food and Agriculture Cooperation Initiative (AFACI)
=== 150 Suin-ro, Gwonseon-gu, Suwon, Republic of KoreaPublished by:
Bangladesh Agricultural Research Council
Farmgate, Dhaka-1215
Published in May, 2013
All rights Reserved by BARC
ISBN: 978-984-500-018-5
Citation : M A H Chowdhury; MS Hassan. 2013. Hand Book of Agricultural
Technology. Bangladesh Agricultural Research Council, Parmgate, Dhaka, 230p.

Sources of Fund : AFACI, Republic of Korea
Cover Design : Afroza Anjum, Graphic Designer, BARC
Printed by: Dynamic Printers
Tel : 88-02-7192771, O1715 036829
E-mail: dynamic $31 (@lyahoo.comGirectings from the Asian Food and Agriculture
Cooperation Initiative (AFACT)!

 
AFACL is an intergovernmental and multilateral cooperation body established by
the Rural Development Administration (RDA) of the Republic of Korea, aiming
to Improve food production, realize sustainable agriculture and enhance extension
service of Asian countries by sharing knowledge and information on agricultural
technology.

RDA, a governmental organization for agricultural research and extension
services, has been trying to develop and distribute the agricultural technology for
last fifty years.

Asa part of these efforts, |. am honored to have opportunity to publish agricultural
books for AFACI member countries with a special fund from RDA.

This activity aims at facilitating the publication and distribution of agricultural
technology books for providing agricultural technologies directly to local farmers
and sharing educational materials in their local languages or English, | believe
that it is meaningless not to be distributed and practically used no matter how
great the technology may be.

I truly hope that this book serves as a useful guide for farmers as well as becomes
a touchstone for closer relationship between the Bangladesh and Korea.

Thank you very much,
Sincerely,
Cha, ie
Secretary General
Asian Food and Agriculture Cooperation Initiative (AFACI) SecretariatFOREWORD
 
 
Improved agricultural technologies are tools that empower fanmers to increase
productivity and thus attain higher incomes. A constant infusion of high-impact
agricultural technologies into farming systems is a prerequisite for accelerating
agricultural development.

lt is to be noted that Bangladesh has made a significant progress in the field of
agricultural research in terms of generation of farm technologies over the decades.
A considerable number of new agricultural technologies have been developed.
However, it is imperative to disseminate new improved technologies to targeted
users especially to farmers. For that, identification and documentation of
promising agncultural technologies in user fmendly manner is very vital and make
them available to farmers through extension services.

| am pleased to know that Asian Food and Agriculture Cooperation Initiative
(AFACI) with special fund from Rural Development Administration (RDA),
Korea has taken up an initiative to provide financial support for publishing books
for sharing promising technology among AFACI member countries, In the context
of global climate change and addressing food security, | feel this effort is timely.

| thank Md. Abeed Hossain Chowdhury, Principal Investigator, ATIN project
along with his colleagues and the scientists of NARS who made valuable
contribution for publishing the “Hand Book of Agncultural Technology™.

| hope this hand book which includes production and management technologies of
crops, fisheries and livestock would be useful for the use by extension agencies
both in public and private.

Dr, Wais Kabir
Executive Chainman
Bangladesh Agricultural Research CouncilACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The publication is an outcome of the AFACL Pan-Asian project “Establishment of
Agricultural Technology Information Network in Asia (ATIN)". The activities of the
project are coordinated by Md. Abeed Hossain Chowdhury, Director (Computer &
GIS), Bangladesh Agricultural Research Council and the Principal Investigator of the
project ATIN. One of the aetivities of the project is to publish agricultural technology
handbook/manuals. For that an attempt has been made for identification and
documentation of promising agricultural technologies generated by National
Agricultural Research System (NARS) institutes and makes them available to
largcted users especially to farmers.

We highly appreciate the cooperation of all the NARS institutes in sharing their
information on agricultural technology for dissemination among different stakeholders
especially the farming communities at national and international level. As well as, we are
grateful to the scientists for sharing their knowledge and wisdom, and the contribution
made by means of comprehensive script on agricultural production technologies without
which it would not have been possible to complete this publication,
We are extremely groteful to the Secretary General, Asian Food and Agriculture
Cooperation Initiative (AFACI) Seeretariat for providing financial support for
publishing the book.

The committee members assigned with the publication of the book deserve sincere
gratitude for their supportive role, constructive suggestion and valuable contnbution
for successful completion of the assignment, The contribution of Dr, Mian Sayeed
Hassan, Principal Scientific Officer (Crops) of BARC deserves much appreciation.
Also, the contribution of Dr. M.A. Quayyum for editorial support and useful
sugpestions to improve the quality of this publication is thankfully acknowledged.
Special thanks are also to Mr. Monowar Hossain, former Senior Secrentific OMicer
(TTMU) of BARC for support and contribution at the initial stage of the assignment.

The continuous support and guidance of the Executive Chairman of BARC Dr. Wais
Kabir is gratefully recognized, Special thanks to Dr. Shahjahan, Ex-Director (R&D),
BSFIC for providing valuable suggestions and corrections on the manuscript.

Lastly, special thanks are given to Dr. Md. Bazlur Rahman, Agriculture Expert of
ATIN project for organizing and compiling the technology information and
colleagues of Computer and GIS unit, BARC, for their help and cooperation to
complete the task successfully.

Md. Abeed Hossain Chowdhury
Director (Computer & GIS)
Bangladesh Agncultural Research Council
¥iCONTENTS
Brea A eee
Acknowiedpement ican
Acronyms aNd AWDPOVIANONS ..........ccccctcseesseeessscctectssieeesersreseeenetseessiorereens J
Prt CCTM ooo. oo. cecsscseecesessecennnesennonseeeponsstrenensstectoeseeesosereensrseecarsemrere
I. CEREAL CROPS
|. Rice
1.1 Variety ... re ibis igadeieaeaieiianpeiria eee ned cine. ARS
1.2 Brediction’ Technatawy ss IMP «| «EG
1.3 Intercultural Operation ... AMHR: EA
1.4 Harvesting and Seed preservation Keren conrhe KEG MA RERNRERAReNear eae
2. Wheat
“ : Variety ... — aanennersnuseverepnantyesnseurensstnuprepsnnerrsneserreesennverenee: al
2 Production Teetindlouy«. cidivee tabetha ieee «| ae
2 2.3 Enter cu ltiral Qper ati seis ccceceerscereeessnsessdeeteesersrecrierieerstieetrersttterrencivs al
24 Harvesting and Seed preservation is iicd cena aA cao Ne eee a
3. Maize
3.1 Variety ... sa siete pen peeaapech caccstccNauieL cape ey a semmeaasaasioaa! ARI
a2 Production ‘Technotopy ... saiNhnkan CCR Sep RERRNTATRERIARTOm ENG — GEE
Fe REACT PAD accep see vessannneccearsassancernnnceneenesepesnasersessrermsee” Go
3.4 Harvesting and Seed Gréservation seeceensasseeeesseenesatseetensssttesesateeeseseeeese 4
Il. TUBER CROPS
I. Potato
I 2 Production Technology «. (iit | Oe
[3 Tntercultural- Operation ccciciciciccicnsiindsincneinne. SF
1.4 Harvesting and Seed preservation sia Ase pase ges hi eats eeise sr eetea gd
I. OILSEED CROPS
|. Mustard
1.1 Variety ... vee peeessteeneeestreeeesarteenenareeseensarerenerseesenstreeesaesrerses ED
L2 Production ‘Teehinolony.; (iasiennteaOelia ben eenrcnctaapatucerecnianciaes || Sn
1.3 Intercultural Operation .... yeentadid direvideceessstivannivisieestddecsiedtcretenaie A
1.4 Harvesting and Sced preservation pa ea Rr lata nett eae a abw
Ground nut
2.1 Variety ..
Zit Production ‘Technatowy
2.3 Intercultural Operation ...

24 Harvesting and Seed preservation .... sereeneneneet
Sesame
3.1 Variety ...

a2 Production ‘Technology.
3.3 Intercultural Operation ...

3.4 Harvesting and Seed preservation gre oon anOnLanRORERRHNR rantncoNeDd ane NanrESt
2 PULSE CROPS
Lentil
1.1 Varicty ...

l2 Production Technology ....
1.3 Intercultural Operation ...

1.4 Harvesting and Seed preservation cite lvuaeeen ssl Geckhaned suntan hii eae
Munghean
2.1 Variety ... Wi
ak Production Technology ...
2.3 Intercultural Operation ...

24 Harvesting and Seed reservation: evseanesnanconseceke
Gram/Chickpea
3.1 Variety ... sit
a2 Production ‘Technatosy
3.3. Intercultural Operation ...

3.4 Harvesting and Seed aréservation vseeecessaeeceeaesenesatserenteseseeateneesseeress
VEGETABLE CROPS
Tomato
1.1 Variety ...

L.2 Production Technology ...
1.3 Intercultural Operation ...

1.4 Harvesting and Seed prenervaltonn aah reins vepnaticainatad oe Raa earner
Brinjal
2.1 Variety ...

ud Production ‘Technology:
2.3) Intercultural Operation ...

24 Harvesting and Seed preservation jap Misti Rue vabceanenegeetae Gasaeeaca nears
wil
433
53
55
ao
68
be
69
71
72
7
74
7
78
79
Bl4.

7.

Cabbage
3.1 Variety ... er
a2 Production Fechnolony:
3.3) Intercultural Operation ...

3.4 Harvesting and Seed preservation ...,......ccesscenessseeeersrerenensareeenseres
Cauliflower
4.1 Variety ...
4.2 Production Tectnoloiy..
4.3 Intercultural Operation ...

4.4 Harvesting and Seed ctieriallon IRF KGET eC
Okra
3.1 Variety ... ei
5.2 Production Nishadlonsi
5.3. “Intercultural Operation sca icincteiiiin ats
5.4 Harvesting and Seed preservation .....c.cccccccesccecsasscccsssnscceeescenesasane
Bitter Gourd
6.] Variety ...

6.2 Production Technol
6.3) Intercultural Operation ..........c0.c06
6.4 Harvesting and Seed preservation ...,.......ccccssssenssscesssseenmaserenmuners
Pumpkin
7.1 Variety ...
fat Production Techinology «:
Ted Trtercultural QPerAvion ..........ccc.cceccessseecenssereencerseeeanseereenseemeneassnnenes
7.4 Harvesting and Seed preservation ...,.........:-::-ceccescrecsesssceeeesaeeeeeestee
Carrot
8.1 Variety ...

Bo? Production echinalogy..
8.3 Intercultural Operation o.........cc..ccsse.
8.4 Harvesting and Seed preservation wai ccciciicescseecsaiaciesicssimenssciasas
Cucumber
9.1 ‘Variety...
92 Broduction ‘Technology. «:
OF Drobericeltanreal Cpe abet sa isscasictce sactnrasasa nanan atic recente paaensaccaruaniasannaite
9.4 Harvesting and Seed preservatiot ..::scccccsccssssvecessaseetevsreescssneveerenesi
1%
$2
82
&4
BS
RG
R7
ae
89
=
92
93
03
05
07
7
100)
. Ol
1a
. 102
102
ssesgia RAM
» 103
« 14VIL
ba
4.

0,
FRUIT CROPS
Mango
1.| Variety ... seineinaee
1.2 Production ‘Technology.

1.3 Intercultural Operation...
LA) Harvesting and Priiit preservation wo... cscs cemeteries
Guava
2.1 Variety ...
22 Production Acasliae.

Bed Leabeere iter al Copperas iia scscsssszscss cause puavneaneasacancvetgeaxaansvsaceaseuasciciins
2.4 Harvesting and Frnlit preservation ..:..ccccc:cccecssssescssisseesscsseeesssseeeensens
Litehi
3.) Variety ...
a2 Production Tedwulner,.

SF Tnntercl teal COCALO .seicciveiespicssencasvecesaicensscacpnsenesavesssciconessatenanaas
34 Harvesting and Fruit preservation .....0ceccceccesssecesssacecessavereeendeetensreee
Banana
4.1 Variety ...
4.2 Production ‘Tehinctony..

4.93 Tntercultural QOPCration .......ccsssscccsssreeessessensmaseeesaserseenaesssenmaaeerennes
4.4 Harvesting and Fruit preservation ........:..-2:essssceesseeer
Jujube (Ber)
§.1 Variety ...
Ded Préduetion "Teshnaliey i
5.3 Titercultural Operation .............0..cccccscreeceeesereeecerseerenseereensserneneatenneans
3.4 Harvesting and Seed preservation .............-:-.:secccscseerescseetereeaeenesssee®
Papaya
6.1 Variety ... ;
6.2 Production Tichinolopy
G.id> ne ncalturel Qperationy si sicscssciccispiavasdasvoaasaveciaeispsavasasasorsiasedvcanypianoes
6.4 Harvesting and Seed preservation ............::c..:cccessssereecsssseeessseneecesee
lov
10
oe
13
114
HS
116
17
ils
119
121
[22
we laa
. 24
125
. 128
129
we 1350
[31
132
wives 4
. 134
136
137VIL SPICES CROPS
ba
3.

Onion
1.1 ‘Variety ...

Garlic
2.1 Vanety ...
22 Produatiot peahanloine..

2.3 Intercultural Operation «.......0.-0cce06
2.4 Harvesting and Seed preservation w..ic.c:c.cccecsccessssccesiessceeesscsseeseaee
Chilli
3.) Variety ... widecnedatigy
3.2 Production Aiehindloaen
3.3) Intercultural Operation ...

Turmeric
4.1 Variety ...
4.2 Production ‘Technology...

4.3) Intercultural Operation ........0ccsceecsssscecsssserecasasseernnsreessesseenensateentses
4.4 Harvesting and Seed preservation .........1.::00.ccccscsseeressessseeesseenessesee
VII. FIBRE CROPS
Jute and Allied jute crops
L.1 Variety ... ohaaanese
1.2 Preduction TC ASL:
. SUGAR CROPS
Sugarcane
LI Variety .. ‘i iestiespaidian
1.2 Pieduction Teehnateay
Me
1.2 Production "Techanlony-.. cass tannoeauunoussarpesustoegoeeauensneneremnue cone
1.3) Tntercultural Qpperation ...............cccceccscecesesceeeesersecreneseecensareneneareeneses
1.4 Harvesting and Seed preservation ...,....0...0c.sccccsssseeeessssteseasseneeasase
14a)
142
144
wae 145
- 146
147
l47
renee US
wie 148
aes . 149
3.4 Harvesting and Seed neccervetion pied h cubdaqeunivitivcceayaday cuiegueeweineabeenniadys
1350
. TH
152
[32
154
tae LES
1.3 Intercultural Operation .............:ccccscccsssseseeessesseeceeneseecnesseeesenseeeeenss ees
1.4 Harvesting and Seed preservation ......0...0.20..c:cscceeeeee
lol
. 169
sieee, Vf
. V3
1.3) Tntercultural Operation —.........cececeecceesseeesennsteeeenereneeaneneneennseseenenses
DA Harvesting Bid PrioGiiGtio: .......:0.0ssssscseresnsssszesarsssrossescsounensasenenenseaenes
178
185A. FISHERIES
Culture of Monosex Gift Tilapia in Pond)... cece ccessesdennssconenns seen
Climbing Perch (Koi culture) im Pond oi..cccccccccccieccccescssceesssciecenctvens
. 191
Improved Carp Polyculture ...

I
2.

3. Culture of Stinging Catfish (Shing) ...

5. Aquaculture of Riverine catfi sh (banaue Sreties)
XI. LIVE STOCK
l. Improved Technology for Native Chicken Production .........0.....0..0:
2. Improved Technology for Cattle, Calf and Goat Production .............

APPENDICES
Appendix 1. List-of Comtributors 0.00. ccctecececcccencacreedassscteenenons
Appendix 2. Calendar of Selected Crops ..............0.02.0.cceeee
xii
[87
189
193
. 196
20)
wie 20E
212
215AEZ
AFACI
AM ROEKC
AWD
BARC
BARI
BAU
BBS
BCRDYV
BFRI
BGM
BINA
BIBI
BREI
BSFB
BSRI
BW
CLS
CRI
DAE
DAP
DAT
DAS
DO
FCR
FRG
GDP
GLH
HY¥
ICARDA
ACRONYMS & ABBREVIATIONS
Agro-ecological Zones
Asian Food and Agriculture Cooperation Initiative
Asian Vegetable Research and Development Center
Altemate Wetting and Drying
Bangladesh Agricultural Research Council
Bangladesh Agricultural Research Institute
Bangladesh Agricultural University
Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics
Baby Chick Ranikhet Disease Vaccine
Bangladesh Fisherics Research Institute
Botrytis Gray Mold
Bangladesh Institute of Nuclear Agriculture
Bangladesh Jute Research Institute
Bangladesh Rice Research Institute
Brinjal Shoot and Fruit Borer
Bangladesh Sugarcane Research Institute
Bacterial Wilt
Cercospora Leaf Spot
Crown Root Initiation
Days After Emergence
Days After Plantation
Days After Transplanting
Days After Sowing
Dissolved Oxygen
Feed Conversion Ration
Fertilizer Recommendation Guide
Gross Domestic Product
Gras Leaf Hopper
High Yielding Variety
International Centre for Agricultural Research in the Dry Areas
MiliICRISAT
IPM
Isel
Ke
MHAT
MIP
NARS
NGO
OP
PI
PLRV
PRSV
PTM
PTOS
PVC
RDV
SAARC
SBP
STP
vha
TSP
TSS
USG
UMS
WRC
¥LCV
YVMV
International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-And Tropics
Integrated Pest Management
Iswardi
Kilogramme
Moist Hot Air Temperature
Muriate of Potash
National Agricultural Research System
Non-Government Organizations
Open Pollinated
Panicle Initiation
Potato Leaf Roll Virus
Papaya Ring Spot Virus
Potato Tuber Moth
Power Tiller Operated Seeder
Polymenzed Vinyl Chloride
Ranikhet Disease Vaccine
South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation
Stable Bleaching Powder
Spaced Transplantation
Ton hectare
Triple Super Phosphate
Total Soluble Solid
Urea Super Granules
Urea-molasses-straw
Wheat Research Centre
Yellow Leaf Curl Virus
Yellow Vein Mosaic Virus
xIVINTRODUCTION
Agriculture is the mainstay of economy in terms of contribution to GDP as well as
improvement of livelihood of majority people in Bangladesh. The rural economy as a
whole contributes to around 60 percent of the total GDP of which around 20 percent
comes from the agriculture sector and 40 percent from the non-farm sector.
Agriculture contributes greatly to improve food security in spite of gradual shrinking
of land resources due to non-agricultural use and ever growing population. In view of
these, there is an urgent need to maintain consistent growth in agriculture sector
which depends entirely on efficient and sustainable agricultural production system.
Location specific, low input, eco-fnendly, demand onented and climate resilient
agricultural technologies would obviously contribute for sustainable growth in
agriculture.

The country has made a tremendous progress in the field of agricultural research in
terms of generation of new technologies over the decades. The agricultural
technology system in Bangladesh has made significant contribution to increasing
yields of different crops and elevating total agricultural prodwetivity, The country has
atiained almost self-sufficiency in cereal production and surplus in potato
production. The production of vegetables has significantly increased. Considerable
progress has also been made in fisheries and livestock sector.

The success of any technologies depends entirely on its adoption by the end users.
The need is, therefore, to package the promising technologies in a simple and
meaningful way and transfer them to the end users, In this context, an initiative has
been taken for identification and documentation of promising technologies and makes
them available to the end users especially to farmers. The “Hand Book of Agricultural
Technology” is. an outcome of this effort taken-up under AFACT Pan-Asian project
“Establishment of Agricultural Technology Information Network in Asia (ATIN)”.
Asian Food and Agniculture Cooperation Initiative (AFACT) is an intergovernmental
and multilateral cooperation body of the Republic of Korea established with an aim to
support improved food production, ensure sustainable agriculture and enhance
extension services of Asian countries by sharing knowledge and information on
agricultural technology. AFACI fosters transnational cooperation among national
agricultural research and extension institutions and their partners in order to share
experience and skills related to agricultural innovation.

In this book, an attempt has been made to present research developed technologies in
a structured form and in simple and useful manner so as to make it understandable
and much easier for adoption by the farmers. This book compiles important
agricultural technology and production methodology, mainly of crops, fisheries and
livestock with its intercultural operations, diseases and pest management, and post-
Clharvest management generated by the NARS institutes. The scientists of NARS
institutes provided the agnicultural production technologies in a presenbed format
developed by the project. The name and other particulars of the scientists are
presented under the List of Contributors in Appendix-|.

In Bangladesh, the crops are cultivated in three different growing seasons namely
Khantl (Mid March to Mid July), Khant-Il (Mid July to Mid October) and Rabi
(Mid October to Mid March). The *kharif-I" (early monsoon) is transition between
dry and wet seasons, *kharif-[]* is wet season and ‘rabi’ is dry season. Rice is the
dominant crop grown in three distinct mee growing seasons namely, “Aus’ (March to
June), ‘Aman’ (June to November) and ‘Boro’ (November to May). Wheat, oilseed
crops, most pulses, potato and major vegetables are grown in rmabi season, Jute is
grown as kharil-I crop and matze, chili, groundnut, mungbean are grown in both rabi
and kharif-I season, A calendar of major crops depicts the sowing! transplanting and
harvesting schedules is presented in Appendix-2,
The technologies described in this book covering mainly agricultural sectors such as
crops, fisheries and livestock would be a useful guide for the practitioners in
enhancing agricultural production. It wall also ennch the knowledge of the scientists,
extension workers, farmers and other stakeholders who are directly involved in
agricultural production system. The handbook containing production and
management technologics of crops, fishenes and livestock would be useful for the
use by extension agencies both in public and private,
One of the prime objectives of this publication is to fulfill the agenda towards making
agricultural technology information available and share it with AFACI member
countries. It is expected that this book wall serve as a basic document for sharing
promising agricultural technologies among the AFACT member countries. We also
hope similar “Hand book of Agricultural Technology” will be prepared and made
available by other for mutual benefit of all AFACI member countries.L. CEREALS
Cereals or food grains, which belong to the botanical family Gramineae account for
about $0 percent of the toial cropped areas and 83 percent of the field crops areas in
the country, These crops are nee, wheat, maize, barley, cheena, kaon, jowar and bajra,
These are the food grains several of which are used as staple food for the greater
portion of the human population, Per-capita per day production of cereals was highest
among all kinds of food. However, the per-capita per day production of cereals in
Bangladesh is the highest of all other crops like roots and tuber, vegetables and fruits.
Cereals are a cheap and easy source of calorie, coming mainly from these
carbohydrate rich crops: Human population, in general, fulfills their requirement of
energy. mineral mainly from cereal food, It is noteworthy that hand pounded (dheki-
ehhata) rice contain more protein, fat, mineral and vitamins than milled rice. BRRI,
BARI, BENA and other organization have developed a number of good high yielding
varieties of cereal crops and their improved production technologies. Among them,
the most important cereal crops are described below.

L. Rice
Rice is the principal food of our people and grown in this country from time
immemorial, It contributes for about 92% of the total food grains produced in the
country. Seventy-five percent of required calories and 55% of protein are met from
rice in the average daily diet of the people. Bangladesh is the fourth largest rice
producer in the world. It covers about 77% of agricultural land and engages about
TO) of population in rice production activities. Nearly 50% of our employments are
generated in nice sector. The contribution. of nce to GDP is 18%. At present, nee
eecupies 11.42 million hectares of land and produces about 33.6 million metric ton
(BBS, 2011). Nobanno (new rice harvest) is one of the joyous festivals, which is
largely observed in rural areas. Different kinds of delicious foods:are made from nce
in different occasions. Products of the rice plant are used for different purposes, such
as fuel, thatching, industrial starch, animal feed and artwork, It also ensures political
stability and food security for the people.

Rice is grown year-round in Bangladesh as pre-monsoon crop, direct seceded and
transplanted Aus rice from March to June (kharif-1}, wet season transplanted aman
nice (kharif-11), from June to November and dry season imgated Boro (rabi) nee
fram November to May.

1.1 Varieties
Bangladesh Rice Research Institute (BRR) released so far 61 high yielding nee
varieties including four hybrid varieties. Bangladesh Institute of Nuclear Agriculiure
(BINA) released & varieties. Some of the popular varieties of BRRI and BINA along
wilh their important charactensucs are shown below:
03“7 Im t Characteristics
ci pra
Grain type: Medium bold and white bellied grain, It
revolutionized rice production in carly cra o
Bangladesh, Plant height: 43 em (Boro) and 100) cm
(Aus) Grain vield: 6.5 vha (Boro) and 4.0 wha
(Aus) season March-June. Duration: i770 days
(Boro) ard 130 days (Aus),
Grain type: Medium bold. Plant height: 115 cm.
Moderately resistant to tungre and tolerant to yellow
stem borer and blast, Weakly photo period sensitive,
It is grown in T. Aman season lune to November).
Grain yield; 5.5 vha, Duration: 145 days.

Grain type: Medium bold ond white grain. Plant
height: 105 cm. Grain yield: 3.5 wha (Boro) and
4.5 wha (Aus). Duration: 170 days (Boro) and 130
divs (Aus).

yield: 6.0 tha (Boro) and 3.0 vha (Aus) Duration:
ivs (Boro) and 130 days
Grain type: Medium bold. Plant height: 125 om;
tall siatured sturdy plant and suitable for haor area. It
is grown in Boro season (November to May), Grain
vield: 6.0 vha. Duration: 155 days.

Grain type: medium bold and white. Plant height;
LS em; sturdy plant and: suitable for haor areas, [is
Erown in Boro season (November to Moy). Grain
yield: 6:0 vha. Doration: 170 divs,
Grain type: Medium bold. Plant height: 110 cm;
sturdy plant, suitable for late and hoor areas.
Moderately resistant to bacterial leaf blight (BL), It
is grown in Boro season (November to May}, Grain
yield: 6.0 vha. Duration: 170 days,
 
cop
Grain type: Long, slender and white, Plant height:
*0 om for Boro (winter) and [10cm for Aus (Kharif,
summer) season, Resistant to tungro and blast,
Diabetic rice and good for Muri (puffed rice), GrainBREI
dhandl
(1994)
Grain type: Short, bold, white and transparent.
Plant height: 125 cm. Resistant to tungro, blast and
sheath blight, moderately tolerant to yellow stem
borer. Photo period sensitive and late aman variety.
Grain yield: 5.0 tha. Duration: 150 days.

Grain type: Long, slender and white. Plant height:
120 em. Moderately tolerant to-sheath blight and
White backed plant bopper. Tolerant to blast. Toberant
to salinity and water stagnant condition to some
extent. Photo period sensitive and late aman variety.
Grain vield: 5.5 who. Duration: 150 days.

Grain type: Long, slender and white groin. Amylose
content low, Plant height: 113 cm. Grain vield:
4.0 vha, Duorathon: 115 dovs,
Grain type: Medium bold, Plant height: 140 om.
Moderately resistant to sheath blight, brown plant hopper
(BPH) and green leaf hopper (GLH) and resistant to
blast and white backed plant hopper, Suitable for Barisal
zone as T.Aman nce. It could be grown as transplanted
Aus. Grain yield: 4.0 tha, Duration: 115 days.

Grain type: Medium slender and white, Plant
height: 90 em; short duration Boro variety.
Moderately resistant to blast, Very popular and high
yielding variety. It is grown in Boro season, Grain
vield: 6.0 Uha. Duration: 140 days,
Grain type: Medium slender and white. Plant
height: 95 cm. Moderately resistant to leaf blight
and sheath blight. Very popular and highest grain
yielder. It is mainly grown in Boro season, Grain
yield: 7.5 tha. Duration: 161 days,
Grain type: Medium bold and white. Plant height:
llS cm. Resistant to brown plant hopper (BPH) and
moderaicly resistant to leaf blight and tungro.
Weakly photoperiod sensitive. Mature cartier than
BRI1, It is mainly grown in Aman season, Grain
vield: 5.0 vha. Duration: 140 days.

 
05Grain type: Short, bold, white belly marked in middle
portion of grain. Early maturing variety. Plant height:
100 cm. Resistant to blast and white backed plant hopper
(WEPEH) and moderately resistant to bacterial leaf blight.
Its very short duriion varety. It is grown in Aman
season. Grain vield: 4.5 ha, Duration: 118 days.

Grain type: Short and bold, Plant height: 105 em,
Moderately resistant to tungrd disease. Only variety
recognized is BPH resistant. It is grown in Boro
season. Grain vield: 3.0 vho. Duration: (55 days.

Grain tvpe: Long slender Plant helght: 90 cm,
Moderately resistant to tungro, This vanety could
tolerate cold at the seedling stage. It is grown in
Boro season. (Grain vield: 3.0 vha. Duration: 140
ihiys.,
Grain type: Medium slender and scented rice,
Plant height: 125 om. Resistant to tungro,
moderately resistant to leaf blight. It is grown in
Amun season, Girain vield: 3,3 vha, Durathon: 140
his.

Grain type: Long, slender and scented. Plant
height: 125 em. Moderately resistant to leaf blight.
Scent Bashmati(D) type. It is grown in Aman season,
Grain yield; 3.5 vha, Duration: 140 days.

Grain type: Long, slender. Plant height: 1(% cm.
Tolerant to sheath rot, sheath blight and tungro, It is
a short duration vaniety. It is grown in Aman season,
Grain yield: 4.5 ha, Duration: 122 days.

Grain type: Medium bold. Plant height: 110 cm.
Moderately salt tolerant variety. Photopenod
sensitive and cartier. It is grown in Aman scason,
Grain vield: 4.5 vho. Duration: 145 days.BRRI
dhands
(2005)
i
Grain type: Long, bold, white and transparent.
Plant height: 115 cm. Moderately saline tolerant but
mature 8-10 days enrlier than BR23. Tolerant to
tungro and sheath blight. It is grown in Aman
season. Grain yield: 4.5 vha, Duration: 148 days.

Grain type: Medium bold and white. Direct seeded
(D5) upland rice: Plant helght: 105 em. Tolenint to
leaf and sheath bheht ond tungeo. Moderately
drought tolerant. It is grown in Aus season (March to
June). Grain yield: 3.5 ho. Duration: 100 dows.

Grain type: Medium bold, white and DS upland
rice, Plant height: 100 cm. Tolerant to blast and
sheath blight, Sturdy stem. [tis grown in Aus season,
Grain yield: 3.5 via. Duration: 10) days.

Grain type: Medium bold and white colour. Plant
height: 100}em. Tolerant to blast. Good for avoiding
flash flood in the haor area. It is grown in Boro
season (November to May), Grain yield: 6,5 t/ha,
Duration: 145 days.

Grain type: Medium bold, Plant height: 105 cm.
Tolerant to blast. Photoperiod sensitive, late variety,
seeding upto 18 September. It is grown in Aman
season. Grain yield: 4.7 tha, Duration: 124 days,
Grain type: Medium bold. Plant height: 105 cm.
Saline tolerant upto 12-14 dsim during seedling
stage and 6 dsm during whole time. Prone to grain
shattering. It is grown in Boro season. Grain yield:
6.0 vho. Duration: 150 days.

 
Crain type: Bold. Plant height: 130 cm, Tolerant to
blast and bactenal leaf blight. Suitable for non-saline
tidal prone area. [tis grown in Aman season (June to
November), Giain yield: 3.3 who, Duration: 145
ihiys,
OyGrain type: Medium bold and white. Plant height:
105 em; highest grain yielder as transplanted Aus.
Grain yield: 5.5 vha, Duration: 110 days.

Grain type: Medium slender. Plant height: 100m,
Matunity earlier thon BRI] variety. It is grove in
Amin seison. Grain vield: 3.5 vha. Duration: 125
ilinys..

BRERidhans0)Grain type: Long, slender, white ond scented
({Banglamoth)| Bashmati type. Plant height; 82 cm. Resistant to
BERRI
dhanS) amd
2010)
BREI
dhans2
(2010)
BRRI
dhanS4
(2010)
panicle blast. [tis grown only in Bore season, Grain
yield: 6.0 Vho. Doration: 155 days.

Grain type: Medium bold, transparent and white,
Plant height: 90 cm. Tolerant to submergence. Suitable
for flash flood submergence prone areas. It is grown in
Aruin season, Geral wield: 4.5 tha for normal and 4,0
wha for submergence shock, Duration: 142 days for
normal and (34 days for submergence shock.

Grain type: Medium slender, translucent and white.
Plant height: 116 om. Submergence tolerant,
Suitable for Mash flood submergence prone areas. It
is grown in Aman season, Grain yield: 5,0 Vha for
normal and 4.5 wha after shock,
Grain type: Medium slender. Plant height: 105 cm,
Resistant to blast. Saline tolerant upto 8-10 ds/m
during seedling stage. 20-24 days earlier than BRRI
dhan 41. It is grown in Aman season, Grain yield:
4,5 vha. Duration; 125 days,
Grain type: Medium slender. Plant height: 115 cm.
Resistant to blast. Saline tolerant upto 8-10 ds/m
during seedling stage. 8-10 days ecarlicr than BRRI
dhan 41. [tis grown in Aman season, Grain yield:
4.5 vha. Duration: 135 days.

 
OFGrain type: Medium slender. Plant height: 100 cm.

Bina dhanT
(2007)
Bina dhank
(2012)
Grain yield: 7.0 vho (Boro) and 5,0 ha (Aus).
Duration: 145 days (Boro) and 105 davs (Aus).

Grain type: Medium slender. Plant height: 114 cm.
Resistant to blast. iis growin in Aman season. Grain
yield: 4.0 vho. Duration: 10h days
Grain type: Medium slender. Plant helght: |00 cm.
Tt 8 grown in Aman season. Grain yheld: 4.0 tha,
Duration: 105 divs,
Grain type: Medium slender, Plant beight: 115 cm,
Tt is grown in Goro season. Grain yield: 7.1 tha,
Duration: 133 days,
Grain type: Long fine grain. It is: carly maturing
high yielding variety (HYV). Resistant to blast, It is
grown in Aman season, Grain yield: 5.2 t/ha,
Duration: 110-115 davs,
Grain type: Medium fine grain. High yielding
variety (HYV). Salt tolerant. Resistant to Bacterial
leaf blight, It is grown in Boro season. Grain yield:
5.5 tha. Duration: | 30-135 days,Hybrids Varities and their Characteristics
Grain type: Medium bold, translucent, white. Early
maturing variety. Plant height + )05 em. Suitable for
all over Bangladesh. [is grown in Boro season
(November to May) Grain wield: &.0 tha,
Duration: 145 days.

Grain type: Medium bold. Early maturing variety.
Plant height: 110 em, Suitable for all over
Bangladesh, Wt is grown in Bora season. Grain
yield: 9, 0 tha, Duration: 145 days
Grain type: Medium slender, transparent and white.
Plant height: 112 cm. [tis grown in Aman season.
Grain yield: 6.5 vho, Duration: 118 days,
 
1.2 Production Technology
Land and soil
Medium high land to lowland its suitable for rice cultivation depending on growing
season. Any land type can be brought under nee cultivation; but its cultivation may
not be economical. Clay and loamy, slightly acidic to slightly alkaline soils are
suitable for nee cultivation,
Seed rate
Seed mate varies depending on crop establishment methods. For example, direct-
seeded rice (DSR) requires more seed rate than transplanted ones. Direct seeded
upland rice: 50-00 ke‘ha; Transplanted rice: §-10 kg/ha for one seedling/hill and 16-
20 kg/ha for 2-3 seedlings/hill would be required.

Seed treatment and soaking
Good quality seed is the prime requirement for a good harvest. Use of properly filled,
healthy seeds would ensure 5-20% higher yiclds than poor quality seeds, Good seeds
ean be sorted out easily. Dissolve 3752 urea in 10 litres of water and put 10 kg seed
into the container and stir seeds by hand, Fully filled seeds will be deposited at the
battom of the container. Discard unfilled Noated seeds from the top, Remove good
1steeds from the contamer; wash it 3-4 times with clean water, If the sorted seeds are
spotless, seed treatment is not essential. However, seed may be treated in 52-55°C hot
water for 15 minute. Seed may also be treated with Carbendazim fungicide (@ 2-3 g/l
of water for 12 hours, One kilogram seeds should be used for each litre of water.
After 12 hours of seed treatment, it should be washed with clean water.

Seed sonking: Seed soaking time is (2-24 hours depending on water temperture
followed by incubation for germination. Incubation period for germination in Aus and
Aman season ts about 48 hours and for Boro season is 72 hours.

Time of sowing
Time of sowing and its subsequent management greatly influence grain yield of nee
in different prowing seasons. Seeds can be sown directly in the main field for direct-
seeded rice (DSR); but transplanted culture requires sowing seeds im seedbed. A
generalized sowing time is shown below:
Type of rice culture Sowing time
Direct-seeded upland 15 March to 30 April
Transplanted Aus (T. Aus) 40 March to 20 April
Transplanted Aman (T. Aman)
* Photoperiod insensitive varieties 15 June to 15 July
® Photoperiod sensitive vancetics 20 July to 30 July!
Dry season inmigated (Boro)
« Short duration varieties 15 November to 30 November (in scedbed)
« Long duration varieties Ol November to 20 November (in seedbed)
Seedbed preparation
Clay and loamy fertile soils are essential for
seedling raising. However, if fertile soil is not
available then 2 kg organic fertilizer, 4g triple
super phosphaic, 7 gm munate of potash per
square meter needs to be added. After 10 days
of secding, 7g urea and 10 gm gypsum may
require for healthy seedling raising. Land
should be plowed and cross plowed 3-4 times
followed by laddering and keep the soil
submerged by 5-6 cm water for 7-10 days.
Finally bed soil is made soft and muddy by
plowing and laddering. One meter wide bed is
prepared lengthwise of the land. There should Standard seedbed for growing rice seedlings
 
‘Seeding for BRR) dhind6 can be done up to 10 August
ibe 25-30 cm space in between two beds from which soil is removed at 3-7 em depth
and spread over the bed. Similar way soil of border areas is removed and spread over
the bed. Finally, bed soil is leveled by a flat wooden plank and kept undisturbed for
about 3-4 hours for seeding pre-germinated seeds. Fifty to 60 gm seed/m= is used in
the seed bed. The canal formed in between two beds can be used for imation and
drainage purposes.

Land preparation and transplanting
Land for direct-seeded upland rice is generally prepared either in dry or optimum soil
moisture conditions. Three to four plowing followed by laddering or harrowing may
require for a good tlth depending on soil types, Land for transplanted culture is
prepared in wel conditions to make the soil soft and muddy. Three to four plowing
and cross plowing followed by laddering may require for transplanting. However, nee
can also be transplanted in zero llage conditions, provided that the soil ts soft and
there are no weeds or stubbles. At final plowing and laddering, land should be
properly leveled for keeping similar water depth throughout the tield,
Transplanting: Seedlings are uprooted carefully before transplanting. In general, 20-
25 day-old seedlings are transplanted in Aus season, 25-35 day-old in Aman season
and 35-45 day-old in Boro season. One vigorous healthy seedling can be used in a
hill, However, 2-3 scedlings/hill may be utilized at 2-3 cm depth. Transplanting
should be done in rows to facilitate intercultural operations. Rew to row distance
should be 20-25 cm and plant to plant, 15-20 cm. If seedlings are dead or hills are
missing, re-transplanting should be done within 7-10 days.

Fertilizer application
Balanced use of fertilizers is essential for satisfactory grain yield, Fenilizer rate
depends on weather, indigenous soil fertility, variety, growth duration and yield
potential ete. Depending on growth duration, yield and season variable amounts are
needed for satisfactory gram yield (Table 1),Table 1. Fertilizer rates and application methods
des
10
nica Pe cnediliced,
days
‘One third urea at basal, 1/3" ot 4-5 tlleringhill stage
and 1/3" at 5-7 days before panicle initiation (PI) stage.

Medium fertile land?

‘Uren in three equal splits a1 15-20, 30-35 days aller
mine 5-7 days
wae icin of Sls gale pasnats 1S) au
of potush (MP), Gypsum and Zinc fertilizers at final land
preparation for both low fertile and medium fertile lands.
NBN deficiency exists after Pl, 30-37 ky ureatha
Whole amount of TSP, MP, Gypsum and Zinc
fertilizers at final land preparation. One third urea at
basal, 1/3" at 4-5 tillerings stage and 1/3” 5-7 days
before PL
Low fertile land
One third urea at basal, 1/3" at 4-5 tillering/hill stage
and 1/3" at 5-7 days before PI.

Medium fertile and
Urea in three equal splits at 7-10, 25-30 DAT and the rest
anweunt at 5-7 days before PLWhole amount of TSP, MP,
Gypsum and Zine fertilizers at final land preparation for
both low fertile and medium fertile lands.

-60-0 | Whole amount of TSP, MP, Gypsum and Zine
fertilizers at final land preparation, One third urea at
basal, 1/3" at 4-5 lllerings stage and 1/3" 5-7 days
before PL
Whole amount of TSP, MP, Gypsum and Zine
fertilizers at final land preparation. Two third urea at
basal and 1/3" at $-7 days
Whole amount of TSP, MP, Gypsum and Zine
fertilizers at final land preparation. One third urea at
basal, LS" at 4-5 tillerings stage and 1/3" S-7 days
before Pl.

 
“Those lund which can give lessthon 10-15 the grain yield in Boro season wed less thun 2.0-27.5
Whe in T. Aman season without fertilization
Those land which can give less than 3.0-3.5 vha grain yield in Boro season and bess than 3.5 vha
in T. Aman season without fenilizationSome additional points on fertilizer application time and methods:
* Organic fertilizers should be added at first plowing during wet season.

® Jn light textured soils, potash fertilizer should be added in two splits- two third at
final land preparation and 1/3™ at 5-7 days before panicle initiation (PI).

® Carry over effect of zine sulfate may be observed in succeeding two crops.

* Urea fertilizer needs to be added in every cropping season. It should be applied in
four equal splits for light textured soils. [tis better to apply urea in 2-5 cm water
followed by incorporation mechanically.

« Zine and sulfur fertilizers are to be added during final land preparation for “in and
§ deficient soils. However, they can be utilized after transplanting for correcting
deficiency symptoms in rice.

Use of urea super granules
   
Urea super granule (USG) is made ay af oY os
from urea, which looks like tablet. ‘ i y a :
Use of USG improves urea use- r*s +*H 4*
efficiency by 20-25%. Rice should be 2 ft +
transplanted in rows at 20 em apart : = z = <
for using USG in between four hills. oy | Sy a ®
USG is placed at 7-10 cm deep into Urea super granule Urea super granule placement
soil at 15-20 and 7-10 DAT during Boro and Aus and Aman seasons, respectively. In
general, one granule of 1.8 gm is used in Aus and Aman seasons; on the other hand,
ane grainule of 2.7 pm is used in Boro season. So, it supply 110 kg urea/ha in Aus and
Aman seasons and 165 Ke urea‘ha in Boro season, However, USG rate adjustment
may be required depending on soil fertility and yield potential of rice variety.

Irrigation
Rice can be grown without continuous standing
water. Generally, 2-4 cm standing water can be kept
up to 10-12 DAT and then reduced amount to
facilitate tillering and reduction of imigation cost,
Sinee rice is mainly grown as irigaled crop during ©
Boro season, loss of irrigation water can be perinraied ae and insiniled pipe
minimized by using plastic and PVC pipes. Alternate in rice field,
wetting and drying (AWD) technique can be employed to save irrigation water, In this
system 23 cm long and 7-10 em dia PVC pipe is used in which 15 cm is perforated.
This perforated 15 em is placed inte soil vertically followed by removal of inside soil.
When water is seen at the bottom of the pipe, the land is irrigated at 5-7 cm water
depth, This technique is followed after crop establishment and continues upto
vegetative stage. Standing water should be maintained at Pl to milking stage.

 
1.3 Intercultural Operation
Intercultural operations are to be done im between transplanting and harvesting. It
14includes gap filling within 7-10 DAT, fertilizer management, pest management, water
Management, rouging and mowing. These have been discussed in separate headings.
Some of the important issues of intercultural operations are stated below:
Fertilizer management and pest control
* Excessive use of N fertilizer favors fungal and bacterial disease development along with
increased infestation of brown plant bopper, leaf folder, stem borer, gall midge, ete,
* Balanced use of potash fertilizer helps in controlling whorl maggot, green
leafhopper, yellow stem borer, brown plant hopper. etc.

Water management and pest control
* Plant hoppers and army worms could be controlled by draining field water.

* Altemate wetting and drying helps in controlling black bugs, plant hoppers, gall
midge, hispa, and most stem borers.

* Irrigation water helps in controlling grasshoppers, thrips, ants, white grubs, mole
crickets, root aphids, tenmites, root weevils and seedling maggots.

Pest Management
Weed Control
Grain yield loss of rice can be mitigated if weeds, insect pests and diseases are
controlled at the right time. As a thumb role, if rice fields are kept weed free for
initial one third of field duration (planting to maturity) of a rice variety, then crop loss
could be avoided, Weeds are generally controlled mechanically (hand pulling, use of
weeder, cic) and chemically. Weed control by herbicides is more profitable than hand
weeding. Pre-emergence and post emergence herbicides can be used for weed control.
Examples of herbicides are provided.

Table 2. Herbicides used for weed control in rice field
   
Machete SG (Butachlon) | 6DAT—[25ke
Miracle 25EC (Oxadianon) | 36DAT_[2L_ | ——SSS—S
HunerPreylachion ————‘|S6DAT [IL |
Pande 33EC (Pendamethyliny |2-SDAT | 2.51 _| Toi fr diet woaled
Topsiar400EC Oxadiagyh | -6DAT | is8mi|
MCPASOOEC | 3-5 leaved weeds | 105 ml_| Toxic for direct weeded rice
Toi ed ene
Sathi 1OWP (Pyrajosulfuran ethyl)| 3-Sleaved weeds | 130gm|
Vachete SG (Butachlor) | 36DAT | 25ke |
Series 10 Pyrjevan ci] Shaved weds | 150m]Major diseases and control measures:
Bacterial leaf blight: This disease can infect rice plant at any
stage. Diseased seedlings die off in the bed known as krisek.
If diseased stem is pressed at the base, sticky bad odorous
ooze can be noticed easily, Older leaves are infected at PI
stage. Watery symplom initiated from the tip of the leaves
that gradually turns t yellow and finally as dried straw.
Stormy weather and rainfall favor this disease development.

   
Control measures:
« Use of balanced fenilizers.
® Use of additional 35-40 ke/ha potash fertilizer may cause disease symptom.
® Urea should not be top-dressed after hailstorms and disease development.

* Ifkrisck develop, drain out water from the field and irrigate after 7-10 days.
® Burn straw after harvesting of diseased crop,
Bacterial leaf blight
Ufra; This disease is caused by small thread worm like
organism, can not be seen by naked eyes. They infect collar
of young rice leaves. The micro organism suck sap, develop
small white spot, which gradually become brown and leaf
blade die out, Plant growth stunted depending on severity of
infestation. If disease develops at booting stage, twisted
panicles remain inside leaf sheaths.

Control measures:
® Apply 20 kg/ha Furadan 5G or Curator MG,
® Burn straw after harvest. Ui infected panicle
* Keep land fallow for 15-20 days after plowing.

® No seedbed preparation in infested field.

« Follow rice-non rice cropping rotation.

 
Tungro: [tis a virus disease, which can occur at seedling to
flowering stage. Green leaf hopper (GLH) is responsible for
the spread of this disease. Light green line alternate with
light yellow one appear parallel to veins in young leaves
followed by deep yellow or yellow-orange coloration of the
upper leaves. The infected leaves twisted slightly, plant
growth stunted with reduced tillering. Diseased plants are
comparatively shorter than healihier ones. j
Control measures: Tungro affected rice plants
and vines curTrier
  
® Initially remove diseased plants and burry into mud.
* Destroy GLH through light trapping,
« Control GLH by spraying Melathion S7EC at | Léha, MIPC 75WP at 1.12 kgvha, etc,
16Sheath rot: A fungus disease develop on flag leaf sheath as
round or irregular brown spot, The spot gradually increase in
size and turn into dark grey color, Panicle emergence is
impaired at variable degree depending on severity of the
disease.

Control measures:
« Burn affected stubbles,
« Use balanced fenilizers.

* Spray Nativo, Folicur, exaconazole.

 
Sheath blight: A fungal disease generally found at tillering
stage. Initially grayish watery mark develops on leaf sheath.
Centre of the speck become gray surrounded by brown |
margin. The spot gradually enlarged in whole sheath and
parts of leaf. Hot humid weather, excessive urea application
and densely populated plants favor disease development.

Control measures;
* Floating stubbles afier final land preparation should be
removed and buried into soil,
* Apply potash fertilizer in equal two splits at final land
preparation and at last urea top dressing.

® Spray Nativo, Folicur or exaconarole.

   
Sheath blight
Blast: A fungus disease, which may develop in the leaf (leaf
blast), node (node blast) and neck of panicle (neck blast).
Oval shaped brown spot, whitish or ash color at the centre
develop on leaves. Many spots merge together resulting in
dead leaf. Whole plot may be damaged because of this
disease. Low night temperature, high day temperature and
dew in the moming favor blast disease development.

Control measures:
« Add organic fertilizer,
Keep standing water.

Use seed from disease free field.

Use balanced fertilizer. Suspend urea top dressing
Apply 400 gm/ha Trooper, Nativo twice in 10-15 days.

 
Leaf blast
Major insects and control measures:
Rice varieties tolerant to insect pests should be cultivated, There are many insects in
the rice field- some of them are predators, some are parasitoids and others are pest for
the rice crop. So, integrated pest management (IPM) technique should be adopted to
save beneficial insects. Control measures of some important insect pests are discussed
17and some insecticides and rates for controlling rice insects are presented in Table 2.

Stem borer: Stem borer affected plants produce dead heart or
white head symptom depending on growth stage of rice
plants,
Control measures:
* Destroy egg mass.
« Control moth through light trapping. Stara borer isons. aed
« Use perching technique. hart and white head
« Spray insecticide if 10-15% dead heart or 5% white head is observed.

« Burn stubbles.

  
 
 
Gall midge: This insect infests growing tillers, which tums
Into onion shoot.

Control measures:
* Regular observation of field.
® Destroy adult insects through light trap.

« Use insecticide if 3% onion shoots are observed. = '
Gall midge and onion shoot
Rice hispa: Grub destroys internal leaf tissue and adult feed '
on green leafy parts resulting in whitish leaf.

Control measures:
« Using sweeping net for destroying adults.

® Use insecticides if 35% leaves are damaged or 4 Rice hispa and daniage
adults/hill or 3 grabs/tiller are observed.

 
Rice caseworm: This insect makes small cages by cutting
upper portion of leaves. Leaves of infested field are white.
These cages float on water in day time.

Control measures:
« Destruction of moths by light trap.

* Collect cages from water by hand net and destroy them.
« Drain water from the field,
* Use insecticides if 25% leaves are damaged. Rice caseworn
 
Leaf roller: Larvae of this insect folds leaf and feeds on
intemal green parts. Buming symptom appears when leaves
are severely damaged.

Control measures:
® Destroy moth through light trap.

* Perching.

® Use insecticides if 25% leaves are damaged at or before Pl stage.

   
Leaf roller moth, larva
atel damaged leat
18Brown planthopper: This insect sucks cell sap from the base
of the plant. Plants dry up showing burning symptom which
is Known as hopper bum.

Control measures:
* Transplant at 25 cm x1 5cm or 20 cm x 20cm spacing for
allowing light and air in the field followed by regular
inspection.

« Use balanced amount of urea.

   
. a . Brown planthopper and
® Drain water if insect is seen, hopper bum
* Short duration variety may be cultivated.
* Use insecticides if 4 gravid females or 10 grubs or both are
found in most hills, Comm unity based control measures
are effective.

Green leafhopper: This insect sucks leaf cell sap resulting in
reduced plant growth. It is a virus disease carrier.

Control measures:
« Use of light trap.

« Use insecticides if green leafhopper is found in every sweeping
net and nearby existence of tungro affected plants,
 
Green leathopper
Rice bug: This insect infest nee field at the milking stage of
nice plant, Pungent smell emit from the adult insect,
Control measures:
* Use light trap.
e Use insecticides in the aflemoon if 2-3 nice bugs'hill are found.

   
Rice bug
Thrips: This insect infests at seedling and tillering stage of rice plant. Thrips make
leston on leaves and sucks cell sap resulting in leaf folding longitudinally.

Control measures:
* Irrigate seedbed/field followed by urea topdressing.
# Use insecticides if severely infested.Table 3. Name of some insecticides and rates for controlling rice insect pests
Insecticide | Ratha | Insecticide | Rate
Stem borer and Gall midge
Diazinon 0 1.70 L Diavinen 1G 16.80 ke
Carbosulfan J0EC 1.40 L Carbaturan 2G 16 80 kp
Fenthout S060 1.70 FL Carbofurnn 50 10.00 kp
Chiorpyrifos 20EC 1h) L. Fipronil 3G 10.00 ke
Rice hispa
Dimethoit 40EC 1LI2k Carbaryl 33WP L770 ke
Malathian S7EC 1.00 1 MIPC TS WP L.l2 kg
Fenthion S060 1.0) L. Chiorepyniphos 25EC 1AM I.
Diazinon 60RC 1.00 L Carbosulfan 20EC Li2L
Leaf roller and Rice caseworm
Malathion STEC 1K L. Carbary| 34WF 170 ke
Fentrothion 50EC 1.00 L. MIPC 75WPF 1.12 kg
FPosilon 33EC 1.) L Bisvinen 1G 16.80 kp
EKrown planthopper
Carkhosulian 20EC 1.00 L. Biazinon 100 16.80 kp
Diasinon AEC 1.00 Carban | 33WP 13 ke
Malathion 37EC 1.00 L Pymetrogin 30'WG 0.3 ke
Carbofuran 30 10000 be, Cartap S50 WP L2kg
Green lcalhopper, Thrips, Rice bug
Malmthion S7EC 1.00 L MIPS 75WP Ligke
Fenitrothion 50EC 1,0 Carbary|] S35WP 1.70-kge
Dimethoit 40EC Lz Formahion 25EC Lz
 
L.4 Harvesting and Seed Preservation
Rice should be harvested at proper ripening stage. If 80% grains in a panicle turn
yellow, it is ready for harvesting. Threshing should be completed immediately to
preserve quality of grains. Conerete threshing floor is better, but if is not available
then use thin jutey/bamboo mat or polyethylene on top of soil. Rice should be sun
dried for 4-5 days followed by winnowing and storage.

Seed preservation
Preservation of good quality seed is the prime requirement for better harvest in the
coming season. Rice field having no weed infestation, no disease and insect pest
attack and free from off types is the right choice for seed collection. Harvest rice at
the proper ripening stage, thrash, dry, winnow and store at right relative humidity and
temperature. Consider following points during seed storage-
« Dry seed to reduce seed moisture content below 12%,
* Sort out fully filled grains while winnowing,
# Preserve seed in air scaled container.

* Ifearthen pot is used, coal tar may be used to coat outer surface of the container.

® Thick polyethylene bag can be used for seed storage.

* Sun dried seeds should be pul into container in full after cooling in shadow place.

* Make the container air tight and keep it above ground.

# Use dried leaves of Azediracta indica (a) 3.25 kg/ton rice seed for preventing insect attack,
202. Wheat
More than 80% of wheat in Bangladesh is grown in rice-wheat rotation of which
about 30% is planted late. Late planting causes a significant yield loss in every year.
Wheat ts often late because of delayed harvesting of T. Aman rice, longer time for
land preparation, unavailability of labourers, late monsoon and some cases of excess
moisture in the soil, The optimum growing mean temperature is about 25°C, It
favours range of temperatures between 20" and30°C with minimum temperature of 3-
45° and maximum of 30-32°C. Well distributed rainfall ranging from 40-110 em is
aptiimum for wheat growth. The area of wheat during 2011-12 ts 3.58 lac hectares
with total production of about 10 lac tones with an average yield of about 2.78 tha.
The yield of wheat can be further increased through HYV wheat and improve
production technology.

2.1 Varieties
Wheat Research Centre (WRC), BARI has so far released 28 wheal varieties. The
salient features of these newly released and 6 popular wheat varieties are stated
below:
Important Characteristics
It isa semi-dwarf high yield potential wheat varicty,
Leaves are broad, droopy and dark green in colour. It
(Bijoy) is an cirly matuning vanity. Grains per spike: 33-
(20MI5) 40. Grains are white-amber and larger in size, 1000-
grain weight: 47-52y. The variety is tolerant to high
lemperiiure and gives 10-20% higher yield under
Jate seeding. Flowr is suitable for chapati making.
The vanety is tolerant to leat blight and resistint to
leat rust discnses and moderately tolerant to terminal
heat stress. Grain vield: 4.3-3.0 tha. Duration:
103-112 days.

BARI It iso semi-dwarf high yielding vanety. The vanety))
Gom-24 [is tolenint to terminal heal stress and suitable for
(Prodip) jgrowing under both optimum and late sown
(205) conditions, This is a carky maturing variely. Grins
are white and amber. 1000-grain weight: 48-54p.
Grains per spike: 45-50. The four ts most suitable
for bread making due to its strong gluten. [t con be
grown successfully throughout the country except in
saline areas more than 6 mmbos. Grain yield: 4.4-
$.1 tha. Duration: 102-110 days
 
alCom-25
(2010)
BARI
Com-26
(2010)
The variety is semi-dwarf, carly maturing and high
yielding, Plant height: 95-100 cm. Leaves are deep
green and broad. It takes 57-62 days to heading.
Grains perspike: 45-55. Grains are amber in colour
and bright, 1000-grain weight: 54-58g, I shows
moderate level of tolerance to tenminal heat stress
giving 6-10% higher yield under late seeding, The
waniety is highly tolerant to bipolaris leaf blight and
resistant to leaf must diseases. It can be grown under
both optimum and late seeding conditions. The
vanely is moderately tolerant to salinity, Therefore,
it can be grown in southem region having salinity
level below 10 dS/m. Grain vield: 3.6-4.6 tho.
Duration: 102-110 days.

The variety is semi-dwarf in height with high yield
polential, Plant height: 92-96 em, Tt requires 1-63
days to heading. Grains per spike: 45-30, Grains
art amber in colour and bight. 1000-crain weight:
48-52¢, The variety is tolerant to terminal heat stress
giving 10-12% higher yield under late seeding. The
wartely is tolerant to bipolaris lear blight and
resistant to leat rust diseases with moderate level of
resisiance to stem must mice (Ue99), The variety is
suitable for growing both in optimum and late
seeding condition. Icon also be grown successfully
throughout! the country except in areas with salinity
level less than 6 dS/m. Grain yleld: 3.5-4.5 wha.
Duration: 104-110 days.

This is a high yielding, short stature variety, Plant
height: 93-95 cm. [It takes about 60-65 days for
heading. Grains are white amber in colour and
medium in size. 1000-grain weight: 42-462. It gives
higher yield than other vaneties although it is grown
upto December 15-20. Grains per spike: 45-50. The
Voriely iS resistant to stem mist mice (Ue99) and lea
rust and moderaicly resistant to bipolaris leaf blight.
Grain yield: 3.5-5.4 vha. Doration: (05-110 days.This is a high yielding, short stature ond early
maturing variety. Plant height: 95-100 em. It takes
(2012) = =|60-65days for heading It is highly tolerant to
terminal heal stress due to its earliness and grain
yield 15-20% higher under late seeding. Grains per]
spike: 45-50. Grains are white, amber in colour and|j
medium in size. 1000-grain weight: 35-40¢. The
variety is resistant to leaf rest and moderately
tolerant to bipolaris leaf blight. It alsa shows adult
plant resisilance (APR) to Ug?" race of stem mest.
Due to its earliness and heat tolerance capacity it
could fit well in the nce-wheat cropping system of
Bangladesh, 1 could alsa be grown in southem part
with salinity level up to 0 dS/m, Grain yield: 3.5-
$.4 wha. Duration: 105-110 days,
 
2.2 Production Technology
Land and soil
Wheat may be grown in high land and medium high land, and also in medium low
land where water receding takes place before November. Land and soil should be
well drained, Generally loam, sandy loam and clay loam soils are suitable for wheat
cultivation. For rainfed wheat cultivation or cultivation with residual moisture clay
soil is preferable. All the varieties could be grown in low salinity (<6 dS/m during
seedling stage). However, vanety BARI Gom 25 can tolemte salinity of 8-10 dS/m
and suitable for growing in southern Bangladesh. The varieties BARI Gom 24
(Prodip), BARI Gom25 and BARI Gom 26 are to some extent tolerant to sterility and
suitable for Boron deficient soils.

Seed rate
Considering seed germination of 80% or more, 120 ke seed per hectare is
recommended, However, for the large seeded variety (BAR] Gom 24), 15-20 kg more
sced per hectare is recommended to maintain standard plant population,
Secd treatment
Seed treatment with Provax-200 (@ 3p per ke seed before sowing is recommended. It
increases plant population by 20-25% and grain yield by about 10-12%,
Time of sowing
The optimum sowing time for wheat is 15-30 November. Since the winter is
edprolonged to some extent in the northem region, seeds could be sown up to first week
of December for optimum yield. If seeds are sown beyond this time, yield may be
decreased by 1.3% for cach day delay. However. varieties like BARI Gom 23, BARI
Gom 24, BARI Gom 25, BARI Gom 26, and BARI Gom 28 possess good level of
heat tolerance and can be sown up to mid December with moderate yield.

Land preparation
Land should be prepared by country
plough, Power Tiller (2-Wheel Tractor)
or 4-Wheel Tractor if the land is at
aplimum’ Zoe" (appropriate moisture
level) condition, Land may be prepared
by Power tiller operated seeder (PTOS)
along with seeding. PTOS in operaiion PTOS sown field
 
PTOS performs 3 functions i.¢,
ploughing, seeding in rows and
laddering, simultaneously. Excess
ploughing may reduce soil moisture,
which may affect germination of seeds.
If there is shortage of moisture in the
soil, irrigation should be given before
ploughing. Further, if there is shorage
of moisture in the soil and also there is not enough time to allow soil to reach “Zoe”
(appropriate moisture level) condition after the pre-sowing irrigation, a light
inigation should be applied after sowing seeds for proper germination, Wheat can
also be planted using a bed planter in raised bed system,
 
Bed planter in operation Field view
Sowing method
Seed could be sown 20 em apart in solid line for better germination and intercultural
practices.

Fertilizer application
Fertilizers like Urea, TSP, MP, Gypsum and Boric
acid is recommended (a 220, 150, 100, 100, 6-7 ke
per hectare, respectively. Two-third (2/3) of urea
and all other fertilizers should be applied at the final
land preparation as basal and the rest 1/3 urea
would be top dressed at 1" irnigation (17-20 days
after SOWIE). In case of acid sail (pH 4.5-5.5}, Flot without Lime Plot with LimeLime (Dolomite) is recommended to apply (a) 1.0 ton/ha once in 3 years cyele. Lime
should be mixed with soil by ploughing 1-2 weeks before seeding.

Irrigation
Two or three imigations are essential depending on the
soil moisture condition. Generally, first irrigation is
applied af 3-leaves stage Le. 17-2] DAS at Crown
Root Initiation stage. If the soil is too dry, irrigation
should be given as carly as at 15 DAS. First inmgation
should be very light and excess water should be
drained out immediately. [f there is enough moisture
in the soil, irrigation
should be delayed for
some days. Second
and third Irrigations
should be applied al
maximum tillering
    
stage (50-55 DAS) "95 irigation at 30-55 days
and early stage of after sowing aller sowing
emin filling (70-80 DAS), respectively. An additional irrigation before or after sowing
may be essential if there is not enough soil moisture for seed germination. Before
starting inigation, weather condition should be observed. [fF there is a possibility of
rain, irrigation should be delayed, Third irrigation should also be light to avoid lodging.

2.3 Intercultural Operation
One weeding at 25-30 DAS is recommended for good yield. Weeds may be
controlled by hand weeding after first imation. Some herbicides viz., 2, 4-D Amine,
Affinity or Fielder could be applied at the rate of 35m herbicide in 16 litres of water
for controlling broad leaf weeds and must be sprayed between 25 and 30 DAS in
sunny days. For chemical weed control, accurate dose of herbicide and spraying need
special attention.

Pest management
Major diseases and control measures:
Bipolans leaf blight and leaf rust are
the two major diseases of wheat in
Bangladesh. Black point disease also
occurs in some developed years due
lo rains al maturity stage, Newly
developed varictics of wheal are
resistant to leaf rust and tolerant to
leaf blight diseases,
 
Leaf blight and rust Healthy seed Black pointed seed
infectianControl measures:
* Use resistant variety.

« Spraving of Tilt 250 EC 2 times (at heading and 15 doys later) (@) 0.5 ml per litre of
waiter is effective to control the incidence of bipolans leaf blight disease and also
leaf rust in case of late sown wheat. It also controls black point disease and
improves the quality of seed,
* Seed treatment with Provax-200 (a) 3g per ke of seed could reduce the incidence of
seed borne diseases like Bipolans leaf blight. black point, etc.

Major pests: Bird and Rat
Control measures:
® Bird should be kept away for 10-12 days after sowing.

# Rat should be controlled using traps or poison (Zine phosphide, Racumin, etc.) or
by any other traditional means.

2.4 Harvesting and Seed preservation
In case of seed plot, the off type plants should be rouged out at least 3 times starting
from flowering up to maturity stage to ensure varietal purity. Crop should be
harvested at full maturity in a
sunny day. Usually, wheat is
harvested by hand. Wheat should
be threshed by paddle thresher or
power thresher, Wheat seeds
should be dried up under sun to
bring the moisture below 12%, It Metallic drum Plastic drm Ployihene bap
may be confirmed by chewing the dried grain. Grain should be cleaned and graded.
For cleaning, paddle or power winnower can be used.

 
Affer final sunning, seeds should be cooled in a shady place. Then the seeds are to be
stored in metallic or plastic drum and polythene bag, All the drums or bags should be
air-tight. Polythene bags should be kept inside gunny bags. All the containers should
be placed on wooden “Danish” or “Matcha“away from the wall.3. Maize
Maize is one of the most important cereal crops in the country and the leading crop of
the world after rice and wheat. It has high productivity due to its large leaf-area and
being a C4 plant has one of the highest photosynthetic rates of all food crops, Maize
has the highest potential for carbohydrate production per unit area per day. [It can be
crown throughout the year because of its photo-insensitiveness. The maize seed crop
contains 11% protein and its nutrient value is higher in comparison to rice and wheat.
In Bangladesh, i occupies 1.68 lac hectares land and produces 10.38 lac metric tons
with an average yield of 6,2 7Uha (BBS, 2011), It can be grown for various uses such
as fodder, sweet com, baby corn, boiled, roasted cobs, pop corn, as field corn for feed
and human consumption and vanous industrial processed products. Maize can be
intercropped profitability with munghean, soybean, groundnut, vegetables and
potatoes etc, Maize has become very popular in the country because of its diversified
uses, increasing demand from poultry industry, higher nutrilive value, higher per
hectare yield and net benefit than other cereals. The area and production of maize ts
increasing rapidly in the country.

3.1 Varieties
Bangladesh Agricultural Research Institute (BARI) has so far developed § (eight)
high yielding variety of maize (composite) and 11 (eleven) hybrid maize through
collection and selection. A brief discussion of these popular vaneties (both in
composite and hybrid maize) along with important features is given below:
MAIZE (COMPOSITE)
sc | Ign carats |p
Varieties Im nt Characteristics Cro
car of Rickease) y
Itis a open pollinated variety. [ts cobs ore lange in size |)p
and pointed at the tip. Grain: Semi flint type with
olden yellow in colour Anthoevanin colouration in
Ist leaf sheath: Medium. Almost resistant to diseases
and pests. Plant height in robis 200-210 cm. DO-
grain weight: 270-300g. Grain yield: 5.5-6.0 wha
(ribo) and 4.045 vha (khan), Duration: 140-145
days (rabi} and 95-100) days (kharit)
ltisaopen pollinated vanety, Ears are conical shape.
Grain type: Semi Mint type with golden white in
colour, Anthocvanin colouration im Ist leaf
sheath: Medium, Almost resistant to diseases anid
pests. Plant height in rabi: |20-200em. 1000-prain
Weight: 30-310¢. Grain vield: 4.5-5.5 vha (rmbi)
and 3.54.5 tha (khanf). Duration: 135-145 divs
(rabi) and 95-110 days (khonifh,Mahar
(191)
BARI
Maine. 5
(B35)
Maize- 7
(BMT)
(202)
especially suited for its high popping percent (95%)
and popping quality. Graint Flint type with bright
yellow in colour. Anthocyanin colouration in 1")
leaf sheath: Strong. Aloost resistant to diseases and
pests. Plant height in rabi: 165-180 em. 1000-prain
weight: 140-150¢. Grain yield: 3.5-4.0 vha (rabi)
and 2.5-3.5 who (khonf). Duration: 125-130 days
(rabi) and 80-90 days (khorifi,
It is a open pollinated variety. This variety is suitable
for fodder purpose. Cob girth of this variety is large.
Grain type: Flint type with brivht yellow in colour,
Anthocvanin colouration in 1“ leaf sheath:
Strong. Almost resistant to diseases and pests. Plant
height in rabi: 175-195 om. 1000-prain weight: 28-
Mite. Grain yield: §.0-5.5 tha (ribi) and 40-15
ha (kharif). Duration: 133-)43days (rabi} and 95-
10Sdays (kharif).

It is a open pollinated variety. Grain: Flint type and
boeht yellow in colour. Anthecvanin colouration in
I™ feaf sheath: Strong. Almost resistant to diseases
and pests, Plant height in rabiz | 70-180 om. 100-
grain weight: 200-310g. Grain yield: 5.0-5.5 vha
(rabi) and 3,5-4.5 wha (khanf), Duration: 145-155
lays (rabi) and 100-105 davs (khanf).

It is a open pollinated vanety. This variety is
companitively resistant to lodging. Grain: Semi flint
type and yellow in colour. Anthecyanin colouration
in 1 Jeaf sheath: Medium, Almost resistant to
diseases and pests. Plant height in rabli: 175-1 80cm. |r
LOM-prain weight: 315-3252, Grain yield: 6.5-7.0
wha (rabi) and 5.0-5.5 wha (khanf), Duration: 145-
[50 days (rabi) ancl 95-103 days (kharif),
It is a open pollinated variety. This variety is the
highest yielder among the open pollinated varieties.
Grain: Dent type and yellow in colour, Anthocyanin
colouration in I leaf sheath: Strong. Almost resistunt
to diseases and pests, Plant height in rabi: |b 195
em, 10M-grain weight: 350-360¢, Grain yield: 6.5-
7.5 wha (robi) and 3.0-6,0 vha (khorif}, Duration: |45-
155 days (rabt) and 93-105 days (kharif}.(BSC)
(2002)
for table purpose al green silage having sugar o
about 18%, When mature seed ts light yellow in
colour and shrunken, Almost resistant to any
diseases and posts. Plant height in cabi season is 150-
155 em. 100-grain weight: 125-130. It produces
about 14.4 vha and 10.3 vha green cob, respectively,
with and without husk. it also produces about 23-25
ha green biomiss suitable for fodder. Duration: In
rab, edible green cob can be harvested between |13-
120 days but seed mature ot 140-145 days.

 
MALZE (HYBRID)
BARI
Hybrid
Naize- 1
(BHM1)
(2(Mi2)
BARI
Hybrid
Maize- 2
(BHM)
(2002)
BARI
Hybrid
Malize- 3
(BHM)
(2002)
BARI
Hybrid
Maize- 4
(BHAT)
(202)
ltis a three way cross hybrid variety, Gain is filled
pte the tip of the eariceb, Grain: Flint type with
orange yellow in colour. Anthocvanin colouration
in 1 leaf sheath: Weak. Resistant to diseases ond
pests. Plant height in rabl: |90-210 em, 1-prain
weight: 350-3752, Grain vield: §.5-9.5 wha (rabi}
and 6.5-7.5 wha (khanf), Duration: 140-150 days
(rabij and 100-110 days (kharif}.

ltisa singh: cross hybrid varety, lis cobs are lire in
size aml tightly covered by husk cover. Grain: Semi
flint type ond yellow in colour, Anthoevanin
colouration in 1 leaf sheath: Medium. Resistant to
discases ond pestis, Mant height in rabis 20-200)
cmt, LOM-prain weight: 370-340. Grain yield: §,0-
®.0 vha (robi) and 71-7.5 who (kharif). Duration:
145-150 days (rabid and 100-105 days (khart),
lt is a single cross hybrid variety. This variety has
excellent husk cover and resistant to lodging. Grain:
Dent type and yellow in colow, Anthoeyanin
colouration in 1 leaf sheath: Strong, Almost |i
resistunt to diseases and pestis. Plant height in rabi:
220-230 em and in kharif (110-005 em), OM prain
welght: 375-390¢. Grate yields 9.5-10.0 wha (ribi)
and 7.0-8.0 vho tkhont), Duration: 144-150 days
(rabi) and 95-100 days (kharif),
tis atop cross hybrid vanety. Grain: Flint type ond)
Oninge yellow in colour Anthocyanin colouration
in I" leaf sheath: Strong. Almost resistant to
diseases und pests, Plant height in rabl: 190-200
cm. [OO00-prain weight: 330-360. Grain yield: 7.5-
#.5 Uhoa (robi) ond 6.0-6.5 who (kharit). Duration:
42-146 days (rabr) and 105-115 days (kharif},ame of
Varieties
(Wear of Metease
BARI
Hybrid
Waive- 5
(RELMA)
(2004)
BARI
Hybrid
Maire &
(BHM 6)
(2006)
BARI
Hybrid
Maize- 7
(BRHMT)
(201)
BARI
Hybrid
Maive- 8
(RAHAT)
(2007)
BARI
Hybrid
Ninive- 9
(BEM)
(207)
lt is a single cross Quality Protein Maize (OPM)
hvbrid variety. This hybrid contains two essential /§
aming acids (Tryptophan and Lysine) almost double}-
than the normal (non-QPM) maize and also higher
protein percentage. Grain: Flint type with orange
yellow in colour, Anthocyanin colouration in I“
leaf sheath: Strong. Almost resistant to diseases andl
pests. Plant height in rabis 195-200 cm, 100-grain
Weight: 290-3 10¢. Grain yield: 9.5-10.5 vha (rabid
ond 7.0-7.8 wha (khaif), Duration: 140-145 days
(rabi) and 95-105 days (kharif, .

It isa three way cross hybrid variety. Grain: Flint) <
ype and yellow in colour Anthocvanin colouratio
in 1 feat sheath: Medium. Almost resistant to
diseases and pests. Plant height in rabl: 200-210
cm. 1000-grain weight: 380-390¢. Grain yield: 9.8-
10.0 tha (rb) and 7.0-7.5 tha (khant) Duration:
140-145 days (rabi) and 95-100 days (khanf).

lisa single cnoss hybrid vanety. Grain: Flint type
ond yellow in colour. Anthocyanin colouration in
14 leaf sheath; Medium. Almost resistant to diseases
and pests. Plant height in rabi: 190-200 em, 1000-
grain weight: 370-3902. Grain vield: 10.5-11.2 wha
(rabi) and &,.0-8.5 vha (kharif}. Duration: |40-145
days (rbi) and 95-100 days (khanify.

[tis single cross hybrid vanity. Grain: Semi flint type
with golden yellow in colour, Anthoeyanin
colouration in 1“ leaf sheath: Medium. Anthocyanin
colouration in silk: Weak. Anthocyanin colouration
in glume: Strong. Almost resistant to diseases and
pests. Plant height in rabh: 200-222 cm, 1M-grain
weight: 280-300¢. Grain yield: 05-114 wha (rabi)
and 3.0-8.3 wha (kaif), Duration: 142-146 days
(rabi) and 95-105 days (kharif).

It isa single cross hybod vanety. Grain: Dent type
with onnge yellow in colour Anthocyanin
colouration in I“ leaf sheath: Strong. Amthocyanin
colouration in silk and glume: Strong. Almost resistant
io diseases and pests. Plant height in roti: 205-230
em, 1000-grain weight: 370-3759. Grain yield: 1).5-)5
12.3 whe (rabi) ond $.5-9.0 wha (kharif). Duration:
145-150 days (rabi) and 105-110 doys (khorifh,
 
a0Important Characteristics Crop
It is a top cross hybrid variety. Grain: Flint type and
Hybrid = jyellow in colour, Anthocyanin colouration in 1"
Maize- 10 |laf sheath: Medium. Almost resistant to diseases
(BHM10) and pests, Plant height in rahis (85-225 cm. 1000-
(2009) grain weight: 370-390¢. Grain yield: 9.0-11.5 tha
(rabi) ond 7.0-7.5 wha (khan{). Durathon: 145-150
days (rabi) and 100-110 days (kharif),
BARI = [It is a single cross hybrid variety. Grain: Flint type
Hybrid = [and yellow in colour. Anthocyanin colouration in
Maire- 1) |!" leaf sheath: Medium. Almost resistant to diseases
and pests. Plant height in rabi: 170-205 cm. 1000-
grain weight: 375-3909, Grain yield: 10.5-12.5 ha
(rabi) and 7.5-8.0 wha (khanf). Duration: 147-153
days (rabi) and 100-105 days (kharif}.

(BHM11)
(2009)
 
3.2 Production Technology
Land and soil
A deep loamy soul, high in organic matter and plant nutrients is the best soil for maize
production. However, with proper management and fertilizer practices, the variety
can be grown successfully on any soil from loamy sand to clay. The soil should be
free from salinity and water logging. It can be grown successfully on soils with a PY
from 5.0- 8.0, but 6.0-7.0 is optimum. If the soil P" is low (below 5), liming might be
necessary.

Seed rate
The recommended seed rate is 20-22 kg/ha for grain crop but for a fodder crop seed
rate would be increased to 70-90 kg/ha. In Bangladesh, farmers use between 20 to 30
kg/ha seed. For Khotbhutta and Sweet Com the recommended seed rate is 10-12 Kp‘ha,
Seed treatment
The most common fungicides used for seed treatment are Furadan and Arasan M.
Seed could be treated by 50 ml of Furadan 30% (seed treater), 2g of Arasan 73'%
(wettable powder) and 12 ml of water per kilogram of seed. Seed can also be treated
by vitavanx-2(Mhel2 S2/kp seed.

Time of sowing
Sowing dates should be chosen to avoid risky environmental conditions such as
excessively cool or hot temperatures and dunng heavy shower, In Bangladesh,
aptimum time of sowing in rabi season is from mid October to Ist week of
December, in kharif | season from mid February to end of March.

alLand Preparation
The variety can be cultivated with normal land preparation or with minimum or zero
tillage. Under normal condition four to five ploughings followed by laddering are
adequate for sowing.

Sowing method
Seeds should be sown in rows. Usually, sowing is done in furrows in light textured
soils and in ridges in heavy soils. In flood prone areas sowing can be done by
dibbling method under zero tillage conditions after receding of flood water, It is
recommended row to row 75 em apart with a plant to plant spacing of 20 cm with
one plant per hill which gives 66,666 plants/ha,
Fertilizer application
Fertilizer application depends on fertility status of the soil where the crop could be
grown as Well as the nutrient requirement of the variety. However, for composite and
hybrid varieties the dose of Urea, TSP, MP, Gypsum, Zine sulphate and Boric acid,
respectively, are: 260, 177, 133, 97, 13.89, 5 and 343, 266, 200, 208, 13.89, 5 ke per
hectare. Time and method of fertilizer application influence maize yield, One third of
urea and other fertilizers should be applied at the time of final land preparation.
Remaining two third of urea should be applied in two installments: One-third at tassel
initiation (8-10 leaf stage) and the rest at about one week before silking or grain
Alling stage. In case of dibbling method of sowing, initial dose of fertilizers can be
applied in the hole, 10cm apart from the plants. The second and third doses of urea
can be applied at 8-10 leaf stage and one weck before silking. For better yield, 5-7 ton
ef cowdung per hectare should be applied.

Irrigation
The total amount of water required for the development of the variety varies with
local conditions. Generally, water requirement is higher in hot, dry and low rainfall
areas, and lower in cooler and more humid areas.

In rabi (winter season), residual soil moisture stored from monsoon can support a good
stand of maize seeds and dibbled during September and October in the Mood-prone
areas, once flood water recedes. Water stress at the time of germination, Moral
initiation, anthesis, and grain filling stage would reduce grains yield considerably. One
irrigation at each of these growth stages ic. within a day of seeding; at 8-10 leaf stage;
a week before silking or grain filling stage, 1s necessary for high yield. Waterlogeing
at any stages of growth is hanmful so, drainage is essential for summer crop.

In kharifl (summer season), there is no need to irrigate except during prolonged
drought period. However, if the crop is sown before rains, a pre-sowing irrigation Is
aerequired for germination and good subsequent growth. Under heavy rainfall
conditions, drainage should be provided.

3.3 Intercultural Operation
For a good stand of maize, thinning at crop establishment stage may be required. In
case of over-planting, thinning to a desired number should be done within two weeks
of germination or When the seedlings are about 15 em tall. Care should be taken not
to disturb standing plants at the time of thinning operation.

Earhing up of plants is one of the most important operations in maize cultivation,
Earthing up means placing of soil near the base of the plant collected from the space
between the rows. This operation helps to provide anchormge of the lower whorls of
adventitious roots above the soil which then begin to function as absorbing roots. This
operation also prevents the plants from lodging, The furrows made out of this operation
could be used as drainage or immgation channels, depending on the requirements. This
operation can be performed with the help of spade at the time of application of the
second dose of urea at 8-10 leaf stage of the crop,
Weed control is essential to ensure good harvest. In Bangladesh, weeds are not a
senous problem in the winter season but in the summer season weeding is necessary.
When the seedlings are about 2 weeks old, first weeding should be done. Another 2-3
weedings may be required depending on the degree of weed infestations during
different life cycle of the crop. Maize farmers of Bangladesh practice hand weeding
when weed infestation is very high.

Pest Management
Although insects and diseases are not a senious problem in the country but the
situation is changing with the increasing of area and intensity of maize cultivation.
The important diseases appear during seedling, growing and maturity stages of maize
are given below:
Major diseases and control measures:
Major diseases are: 1) Seed rot and seedling blights; 2) Leaf blight; 3) Yellow leaf blight;
4) Stalk rots: and 4) Ear rot and kernal rots.

Control measures:
« Application of proper fungicide should be done to control those diseases.

® Tilt 250 EC ja 0.05% should be applied to control leaf blight diseases, starting
when lesions are first observed.

agMajor insects and control measures
Major insects are: 1) Maize aphid; 2) Com earworm; 3) Cut-worms; 4) Stem borer;
5) Seedling maggot and 6) Hairy caterpillar
Control measures:
« For controlling cutworm, field irrigation, application of poison bait or application of
granular insecticides @) 1.5 kg aha should be done.

* Dursban, Pyrifos 20 EC (@ 3 ml/litre of water should be sprayed to control soil
borne insects,
Marshall 20 EC or Diazinon 60 EC (@ 2ml/litre water could be sprayed properly to
control stem borer insects.

* For ear worm, the larvae could be killed after collecting from the infested cobs.
Cypenmethnn (Ripcord 10 EC! Cymbush 10 EC! Fenom 10 EC) @) 2ml/litre water
could be sprayed to a control this pest.

3.4 Harvesting and Seed preservation
Harvesting should be done when plants show distinct signs of drying, the husk cover
is completely dry and the grains are fully mature, Grain maturity could be identified
from the milk line of kernels or the formation of a black layer at the junction of grain
and placenta, Premature harvesting reduces the yield and the genmination ability of
the seed, If possible, a prompt harvest of the seed crop after it reaches physiological
maturity is recommended, as delays will unduly expose the seed to temperature,
rainfall, diseases and insects, bird damage, and theft. It is commonly harvested with
13 to 25% moisture content. Harvesting fully mature grain would result in maximum
yield, improved appearance and reduced susceptibility to injury from high drving
temperatures. In Bangladesh, harvesting is done by hand. The cobs are separated
from the stem and the plants are cut near the ground. Soon after harvesting, the cobs
should be dehusked and sundried for about 2-3 days, Dried cobs are shelled either by
com sheller or by hand. Both power and manually operated sheller could be used.
The shelled kernels should be dried again before storing at optimum moisture level of
l2 to 13 percent.

Drying is important before storage to avoid deterioration, reduction of seed borne
insect and diseases attack and to maintain viability of seed. If maize grains are used
for seed purpose, it may be treated with a fungicide or a combination of fungicide and
insecticide to protect it against atiack by diseases and insect pests. The treatment
should be done before logging and stomge.

a4Il. TUBER CROPS
1. Potato
Potato is the third most important crop in Bangladesh, In respect of nutrient, potatoes
are comparable with nce and wheat. It can easily be digestible. Although potato is a
temperate crop, it can be grown in most parts of the country during the winter season,
Well fertilized, sunny weather with sufficient soil moisture is appropriate for potato
plantation. The optimum growth and development takes within 15-219 C. It is being
cultivated in Bangladesh since 1960 from exotic varieties. Al present, potato is grown
in about 4.61 lac hectares of land to produce $4 lac tons, The average yield of potato
1s 18.08 t/ha (BBS, 2011), Its production can be increased upto 30-40 tha using high
yielding varieties and improved production technology. A brief description of these
vanities, their important characteristics and production technology is given below.

L.1 Varieties
Tuber Crop research Centre (TCRC) of BARI has so far developed 44 varieties which
were selected from exotic varieties, foreign germplasm and germplasm developed in
Bangladesh through crossing programme. The most popular and suitable variety is
selected as per producers and end users requirement. A brief description of 27
released varieties along with their important characteristics is given below.

Important Characteristics
BART Alw-5 | lt was introduced fram the Netherlands. Tuber: Whitish skin,
(Patromes)
(1993)
BARI Alu-6
(Multa)
(1993)
BART Alu-7
(Diamant)
(1993)
BARK Alu-#
(Cardinal)
(1993)
(Kufri
Sindhuri)
(1993)
 
round to oblong shaped. Early maturing variety, Tuber yield:
23-30 tho, Duration: §3-90 days.

It was introduced from the Netherlands. Tuber: White skin,
oval to oblong shaped. This is a popular variety. Tuber yield:
25-30 Vha. Duration: 85-90 days,
It was introduced from the Netherlands. Tuber: white skin,
oval te oblong shaped, medium to large size, smooth skin, light
yellow flesh, shallow eve. This is the most popular variety,
Tuber yield: 25-55 ha, Duration: 90-95 days.

lt was introduced from the Netherlands. Tuber: Red skin, oval
shaped, medium to large size, smooth skin, and shallow eye.
This is also a most popular variety. Tuber yield: 25-35 wha,
Duration: 90-95 days.BARIA
(Granola) [round to oval shaped, medium size, light yellow Mesh, smooth)
(194) skin. Suitable for export. 1 con be harvested at 60-65 days
after planting for early market. Tuber yield: 20-30 tha.

Duration: 85-95 days.

BARI Alu-15)} li was introduced from the Netherlands, Tuber: White skin,
(Binella) oval shiped, smooth skin, Tuber yield: 25-35 wha. Duration:
(1g) 0-05 daws,
BARI Alw-16| lt was introduced from the Netherlands, Tuber: White skin,
tArinda) = joval shaped, smooth skin. Tuber yields 25-35 tha, Duration:
(2000) | 90-05 days,
BARD Alu-17)[t was introduced from the Netherlands, Tuber: Attractive reil
(Raja) skin, owol shaped, yellow flesh, smooth skin, shallow eve.
(2000) Substitute for local variety. Moderately resistant to late blight.

Tuber vield: 25 -30 vha. Doration: 90-95 days.

BARI Alu-19)[t was introduced from the Netherlands, Tuber: Pale yellow]
(Bintje) [skin, oval to long oval, medium to large size, smooth skin,
(2003) | flesh pale yellow, shallow eye. Suitable for food processing. |
Tuber yield: 20-25 tha, Duration: 90-95 days.

BARI Alu-21|[t was introduced from the Netherlands, Tuher: White skin,
(Provento) jovel to oblong shaped, medium to large size, smooth skin,
(204) pale yellow flesh. Long dormancy period in natural storage,
Tuber vield: 25-35 wha. Duration: 40-95 days.

BARI Alu-22|1t was introduced from CIP, Lima, Peru. Tuher: Red skin,
(Saikat) = jround to oval shaped, medium size, smooth skin, pale yellow
(20-4) and flesh, Suitable for saline areas, Tuber yield: 25-30 t/ha,
Duration: 83-95 days,
BARI Alu-25|11 was introduced from the Netherlands. Tuber: Red skin,
(Asterix) = joval to oblong shaped, medium to large size, smooth skin and
(2005) pale vellow flesh. Suitable for food processing. Tuber viel:
25-35 vho. Duration: 90-95 days.

BARI Alu-26) 11 was introduced from the Netherlands. Tuber: White skin.
(Felsina) = joval to oblong shaped, large size, smooth skin and pale yellow
(2006) =| flesh, Tuber yield: 25-35 vha, Duration: 90-95 days,
BARI Alwe27||t was introduced from Germany. Toher: White skin, oval to
(Esprit) = joblong shaped, large size, smooth skin and pale yellow Mesh.

(2005) Suitable for food processing. Tuber yield: 25-35 t/ha.
Duration: 83-90 days.

 
a6BART Alu }[i was introduced from the Netherlands. Tuber: Red skin,
2 (Lady | Round to oval shaped, medium size, smooth skin, attractive
Rosetia) jyellow flesh and medium deep eye. Suitable for processing.

(2008) = | Tuber yield: 25-30 vha, Duration: 85-90 days.

BART Alu-29) [1 was introduced from the Netherlands. Tuber: Red skin,
(Courage) jround to oval shaped, medium to large size, medium deep eye
and attractive yellow flesh. Suitable for processing. Tuber
yield: 20-26 vha. Duration: 85-9) days.
BARD Alu-30) [i was introduced from Germany. Tuber: White skin, oval
(Meridian) |shaped medium size, shallow cye and light vellow flesh.
Tuber yield: 25-35 wha, Duration: S95 dwys,
BARI Alu-31) [1 was introduced from the Netherlands. Tuber: White skin,
(Sagitta) joval shaped large size, light deep eve and light yellow Mesh.
(2010) | Taber yield: 30-10 tha. Duration: 0-95 divs,
BARI Alu-32|liwas introduced from the Netherlands. Tuber: Red skin,
(Quincy) = joval to long oval shaped, large size, shallow eye and light
(2010) =| yellow flesh, Tuber yield: 30-40 vha. Duration: 90-95 days,
BARD Alu-33 | lt was introduced from the Netherlands, Tuber: White skin,
{Almera} jlong oval shaped large size. shallow eye and pale yellow
(2001) flesh, Tuber vield: 25-35 Uha. Duration: 40-95 cays.

BARI Alu-34 | lt was introduced from Germany, Tuber: Red skin, long oval
shaped large size, shallow eve and deep yellow flesh. Tuber
wield: 25-35 wha. Duration: 90-95 days.

BART Alu-35} lt was developed in Bangladesh by crossing progr. Plant:
Medium hewht, imtermediate type of stem, stem green with
Weak extension of anthocyanine coloration, Leaves: Medium
size of leaf with weak anthocyanine coloration on the mid rib,
very weak waviness of margin of the leaflet, no anthocyanine
coloration on the blade of young Icaflets at apical rosetic.
Tubers: yellow skin, oval shaped medium deep eye and light
cream flesh. Tuber vield: 38-45 tha. Duration: 90-95 days.

lt was developed in Bangladesh by crossing programme.
Plant: Medium height, intermediate type of stem, Growth
habit semi-crect to-spreading, stem green with medium
extension of anthocyanine coloration. Leaves: Medium size
of leaf with strong anthocyanine coloration on mid rib. Weak
waviness of margin of the leaflet. Tuber: Red skin, long oval
shaped, medium to large size, shallow eye and light yellow
flesh, Tuber yield: 34-42 vha, Duration: 90-95 days.

 
av‘car of Release
BART Alu-37| 11 was developed in Bangladesh by Crossing programme.
(2012) Plant: Medium height, intermediate type of stem, stem green
with no anthocyanine coloration, Leaves: Medium size of lea
with no anthocyanine coloration on mid rib, very weak
waviness of margin of the leaflet. Tuber: Yellow skin, oval to
long oval shaped, medium size, shallow eye and light yellow
fesh. Tuber vield: 38-44 vha. Duration: 90-95 days.

BARI Alu-38)1t was introduced from Germany; Plant: Medium height,
intermediate type of stem, growth habit semi-erect and stem
green with very weak anthocyanine coloration on the base of
the stem. Leaves: Medium green leaf, leaf with no
anthocyanine coloration of mid rib, very weak waviness of
margin of the leaflet, Tubers: Brownish skin, oval to long
oval shaped, medium size, shallow cye and cream colour
flesh, Tuber vield: 32-40 vha. Duration: 90-95 days.

BARI Alw39|1t was introduced from the Netherlands; Plant: Medium
(2012) = [| height, intermediate type of stem, growth habit semi-erect to
spreading, stem green with no anthocyanine coloration.
Leaves: Medium size of leaf with no anthocyanine coloration
on mid rib, very weak waviness of margin of the leaflet.
Tubers : Brounsh skin, oval to long oval shaped, medium ta
large size, shallow eve and cream colour flesh. Tuber vield:
30-40 vho. Duration: 90-03 days.

 
1.2 Production Technology
Land and soil
Medium high to high land with loamy to sandy loam soil is the best suitable tor
potato cultivation,
Seed rate
| .5- 2.0 wha (whole tuber); 1.2 -1.5 vha (cut tuber)
Seed treatment
Seed should be treated with 3% boric acid solution before sprouting for controlling
the common scab disease. In this case, boric acid should be melted with light heat
water. After cooling of the boric acid solution, it should be sprayed on potato tuber.
Time of sowing
13 to 30 November is the optimum time but sowing may be done in October to December.

Land preparation
Soil should be tlth properly by ploughing and laddering.

a8Sowing method
Ridge to Furrow method
Fertilizer application
Cowdung 10 t/ha (at final land preparation), (1) Urea 350 kg/ha (50% at the time of
planting + 50% at 30-35 days after planting), (ii) TSP 100 kg/ha, (iii) MP 210 kg/ha,
(iv) 2ypsum 84 kevha, (v) Micronutrient deficient in soil like 4n50, and Boric acid
may be fertilized fa) 12 and 5 kg/ha, respectively as basal dose. Zn fertilizer is not
allowed to mix with Phosphatie fertilizer.

Irrigation
Irrigations need for potatoe cultivation depending on the soil type. Sometimes, pre-
sowing irrigation may be required. Normally irrigation at §-10, 40-45 and 60-65 days
after sowing could be applied. Irrigation water should be maintained 2/3™ depth of
the furrow,
1.3 Intercultural Operations
Weeding followed by top dressing and earthing up should be done at 30-35 days after
sowing (DAS). In some cases, weeding may be required at 10-15 and 60-65 days
after sowing (DAS).

Pest Management
Major diseases and control measures:
Fungal disease
A total of 57 diseases and disorders of potato have, so far, been recorded in
Bangladesh, Among them, late blight (Pivtophiitera infestans (Mont de Bary), stem
canker and Black seurf (Rhizoctonia solani) are the most important disease of potato
in Bangladesh,
Late Blight
Late blight is the major limiting factor to increase potato production. In Bangladesh,
the infection of late blight was first reported in 1922. It occurs every year under
favourable condition (High humidity, low temperature and
foezy weather) with varying intensities wherever potato is
erown in the country, More than 25% yield is reduced duc
to late blight of potato every year. All the cultivated
varicties in Bangladesh are more or less susceptible to late
blight. Potato variety, Raja, Dheera and BARI TPS-| and
2 showed tolerant reaction to late blight disease. In
general TPS progenies are more tolerant compared to
tuber varieties. Late blight infected stem
 
agLate blight appears on leaves, petiole and stem as pale green and tums into brown to
black water soaked spots under favorable condition. White cottony mycelial growth
appears under the surface of infected leaf in the morning during high humidity and
leaf wetness condition, Under cool, foggy and wet conditions, whole plant of the field
rot and die rapidly within 4-5 days and tubers also rot and spread in storage. Under
severe condition, emits foul smell from rotted leaf in the field. The sections from
infected tuber appeared brown with necrotic tissues.

Control measures:
« Use disease free certified seeds.

* Follow early planting and carly harvesting (15 Novto 15 Feb).

® Weed management,
® Haulm pulling at 80 DAP.

* Under cool, foggy and wet conditions, spray should be continued with fungicides
al 14 days interval. Any of the fungicides hike Dithane M-45 or Indofil or Melody
duo or Hamancozeb (a) 0.2% at 15 days interval should be done.

When symploms appear, spraying with fungicides or mixture of fungicides at 7
clays interval
Secure (a) | g/ L water or
Melody duo 2 g + Secure | ¢ in | litre water or
Acrobat MZ 2 2 + Secure | g in | litre water or
Acrobat M# 2 ¢+ Melody dwo 2 gin | litre water or
Melody duo 2 2 + Dithane M-45 2 g in | litre water
High ridge during earthing up.

Restricted imgation in the infected field.

Do not cover the harvested tuber lots by infected potato debris.

Sorting of infected tubers during storage.

Stem canker and Black Scurf
Causal fungus of this disease is Riizactonia sofaniand now becoming a major disease
of potato in Bangladesh,
Acnal green tubers produce in the axes of petioles and branches.Sunken shallow
brown cankers affect stolons and stem at or below the soil line. Ultimately, infected
plant died and tuber size reduced.

Control measures:
« Use of disease free seed.

® Destruction of crop debris.

Crop rotation with cereals or leguminous crop.
Seed treatment with Boric acid (3%) before storage.
Rogue out of diseased plant from the field. Stem canker and Black
Spraying with Bavistin (0.1%) at the base of the plant. Seurf Infected plant
Avoid excessive inmigation,
 
40)Bacterial disease management
Bacterial wilt (Aalsiania solanacearum), Common seab (Streptomyces scabies) and Soft
rot (Erwinia spp.) are the most important bactenal diseases of potato in Bangladesh,
Bacterial Wilt
Initial symptoms of will may affect one side of a leaf first,
or one branch and not another. Later symptoms are severe
wilt and death. Vascular strands darken and in cross
section a gray to brown slime exudes, except in mild cases §
which may be confirmed by the flow of milky white
strands from a stem section immersed in clear water.

   
Bacterial wilt infected plant
Control measures:
Rresistant source of bacterial wilt was not detected in Bangladesh.

Use of certified seeds.

Use of whole tuber.

High ridge during earthing up.

Crop rotation with non-solanaceous crop,
Soil application with stable bleaching powder (SBP \ia@) 25-30 kg/ha,
Intereropping with maize or wheat.

Minimum irrigation should be maintained and irrigation should be stopped at the
moment of disease expression,
* Diseased plant should be removed including surrounding soil and apply SBP at the
rate of 20-25 kev/ha into the affected area,
Blackleg and Soft Rot
Black and slimy lesions most offen progress
up the stem from the soft rotted mother tuber.
Young plants are cammonty amaaiee and erect.

  
occur, finally wilting and ak Soft | rolin
field of storage often follows any type of tuber e ny
inj ury. Tissues become wet, cream to tan Black leg ifecuad los Soft rot infécied tuber
colored and soft, and are easily separated from
healthy tissue. Emit foul smell.

Control measures:
# Use diseased free seed.

® Prohibit excess irrigation in the field.

® Early cultivation should be done to avoid high temperature.

® Maintain proper grading before storage.

« Soil amendment with SBP (@ 20-25 kg/ha.

® Tuber should be treated with 3.0% Bone acid solution before storing as sced tuber.

4]« Crop rotation with cereals or leguminous crop,
* Harvest in dry weather and proper care during harvest, transit & storage.
® Potato should be storedin dry and well ventilated room,
« Destruction of crop debris.

Common Seah
Scab appears on tubers as circulate to irregular lesions as
corky-appearing, raised and pitted. They are variable in
size and shape.Peridenm turns brown and rough. Under
severe condition, the penderm depressed and rotted,
Control measures:
® Application of ammonium sulfate (equally in three F
installments) instead of urea as a nitrogen source Common scab infected wher
proved most effective in reducing common scab disease of potato,
® [twas also found that the incidence of common scab can be minimized cflectively
by maintaining proper soil moisture from 30 DAP to 60 DAP.

® Seed treatment with 3% boric acid before storage showed most effective in
reducing scab disease of potato,
« Crop rotation with cereals or leguminous crop.

« Green manuring crop should be used,
  
Virus diseases
Viruses are the main problem in our country to reduce potato production. tt decreased the
production generation to generation of potato. There are several viruses remain im plant
and tuber in latent condition. However, major viruses of potato are described below.

Potato Leaf Roll Virus Disease (PLRV)
Leaves become upward rolled which initiates from lower
leaves. Rolled leaves are stiff and leathery and plant growth
often stunted. PLRY is transmitted by aphid. Spots appear on
leaves and defoliation occurred, PLRY infected tuber
Potato Viruses ¥ (PV¥)
Leaves became twisting and downward turning of leaflet
margin. Plant growth severely stunted, Leafand tuber size , — =
reduced markedly, Leaves look shiny. e .

Mosaics (Potato Viruses XS and M1) diseases Pie y inieciee. Als
Mosaic symptoms may be caused in leaves of potatoes by
several different viruses singly or in combination, Normally
causes mosaic, crinkling, lop necrosis, spotting or even leaf
drop, Sometimes necrosis of petioles and leaf veins are
eccurred, Leaves are stiff and leathery and plant growth often
stunted. Yield is reduced. PLRY, PVY¥ and PVS
combinely infected plantControl measures:
« Use disease free certified seed.

« Follow carly planting and early harvesting (15 Nov to 15 Feb).
Isolation distance maintains,
Weed management.

Virus eradication through tissue culture,
Indexing viruses through ELISA,
Production of breeder seed under net-house,
Haulm pulling at 80 DAP.

Cirding, sorting and storing in cold storage maintaining proper temp.
® Rouging all virus infected plants,
« Spraying systemic insecticides as Admire (0.05%) to control vector.

* * £*£ ©
Major insects and control measures:
Potato is an important crop world wide. The yield of potato is greatly reduced due to
attack of several insect pest.and diseases, including several viruses which contribute
to the degeneration of seed stocks. For better tuber crop production, good quality of
secd materials needs to be supplied to the farmers. So, emphasis should be given ta
produce disease and insect free seed, Major insect pests of potato are Cutworm,
Potato tuber moth, Aphid, Whitefly and Leafhopper.

Potato cutworm (Agretis ipsifan)
Cutwonn isa polyphagous and the most devastating soil pest.
Yield is reduced up to 35- 40%by cutwonm, Young caterpillars
feed on leaves and later on siems. Mature caterpillars cause
the most damage. They are capable of eating or destroying
the entire plant. Some times they cut-off young seedlings at
ground level during night, Caterpillars feed on tubers and
roois, boring a wide shallow hole.

 
Potiie cuthwonn
Control measures:
* Hand picking of caterpillars at night by torch or very carly moming.

* Flooding of the field for a few days before sowing can help to control culworm
caterpillars in the soil.

* Potato crops grown for sced should be monitored closely and good sanitation
should be maintained.

* Use of poison bait by controlling cutwonn.

« Use of insecticides Chlorpynfos (Chlorpyrifos 48EC/Pyrifos 20EC fa) Sm1/1L water
at 15 days interval)/Carbofuran (Dursban 20EC and Furadan § G (e: 20 kg/ha.)

* Pheromone traps are used to monitor and catch moths of cutworms.

43Potato Tuber Moth (Pithortimaca opercufelfa)
Potato tuber moths (PTM) attack potato in
both field and storage.It causes 100% tuber
damage in the farmers field and home
storages. Small larvae usually enter the tuber
at the eyes. Frequently, the larvae feed just
below the surface of the potato leaving a dark
tunnel, The tunnels are filled with larval
excreta, Damage tuber attacked by bacterial infestation resulting potato tuber is rotted.

 
Damage in field Damage in slomgc
Control measures:
Pest incidence can be reduced through cultural practices such as —
« Controlling irrigation to prevent soil cracking that allows moths to reach the tubers.

® Hilling-up to properly cover the tubers.

® Harvested tubers are not left in the fields overnight; the heaps of tubers should be
covered with polythene sheet / dried straw/ cloth to laying egg on the seed tubers.

e Using pheromone traps to capture adult moth and moniter field populations.

* Likewise, repellent plants such as Minthoastachvs spp., eucalyptus, or lantana help
to protect stored tubers.

® The PTM damage can be reduced by dipping tubers in suspension of Phenthoat /
Deltamethrin at 2 ml/L of water for 15 minutes and then drying after shade
especially seed tubers.

Aphids
Green peach aphid: Mycus persicae
Potato aphid: Macrosipium caphorhiae
Aphid colonies can be easily identified in plant temminal leaves and on the underside
of leaves and plant root in the field, As a result black sooty mould fungus that grows
on the honeydew produced by the nymphs will cover the lant. Due to severe
infestation, leaf become curl and finally dried
from upper portion of the plants. They also
appear in tuber sprouts in stores, Finally they
transmit viruses to seed potatoes.

 
Control measures: Aphid affected laves Aphid Infected tubers
«® Foliar sprays of Neem seed extract (] kg, half broken neem seeds are dipped into
10 litres water for 12 hours).

® Foliar spray of soap water (@) 2om /L of water at 3 days interval,
® Sticky yellow traps can be used for population level evaluation and control,
e Different predatory and parasitoid insects also feed on aphids.Common predators
are lacy bird beetles and their larvae, green lacewing larvae, and syrphid fly larvae.

e Schedule spaying of insecticides such as-Melathion (Fyfanon 57EC, Malataf
STEC@) 2ml/1L of water)/Imidaclorpid (Admire 200 SL f) 0.4ml/1L of water)
should be monitored regularly.

44* Haulm pulling will be done for seed potato production,
* Rogue infected potato plants to reduce the incidence of viral disease infection
within a field,
White Mics
(Afewrodicus disper, Bemisia tabaci)
Besides the presence of nymphs and adults on the underside of leaves, white flies
cause yellowing of infested leaves. Whitefly excretes honeydew covers the lower
leaves and supports the growth of black sooty mould,
which may coal the entire plant. Recently, potato apical
leaf curl virus has been reported and upto 100%
infection occurred in India. This virus transmitted
through white fies,
Control measures:
e Unnecessary use of insecticides should be avoided. White fly
® Sticky yellow traps can be used for population level evaluation and control.

* Foliar sprays of Necm seed extract (1 ke, half broken neem seeds is dipped into 10
litres water for 12 hours).

* Foliar spray of soap water (a) 2gm /L of water at 3 days interval.

« Monitor on schedule spray of insecticides such as-Melathion(Fyfanon S7EC, Malataf
$7 EC @ 3 ml/1L of water) or Imidaclorpid( Admire 2008Lia) 0.5ml/1L of water)
 
Leafhopper (Empoasce spp. and Amrasce spp.)

Besides the presence of nymphs and adults on the
underside of leaves, leafhoppers burn leaf edges with
top leaf roll and foliar yellowing. Plants may die
prematurely, Some species transmit mycoplasmal
diseases such as aster yellows and witches’-broom
disease.

 
Control measures:
Avoid alternate host from the seed potato production fields,  Leathopper
Use light trap for preventing infestation.

Resistant or tolerant varieties can be used for controlling leafthopper population,
Foliar spray of Neem seed extract (1 kg, half broken neem seeds is dipped into 10
litres water for 12 hours).

Schedule spray of insecticides such as- Quinalphos (Corolux 25EC, Debigueen
25EC and Kinalux 25EC (@ 2 ml/L of water) and monitored regularly.

*- * * &
1.4 Harvesting and Seed preservation
Harvesting should be done at &0 to 90 days after sowing (depending on the varieties).
Alter curing, the potato tuber should be preserved in cold storage at 2.5"- 4" C with
85-95 % Relative humidity (RH).

45Il. OIL SEED CROP
Oil seed is one of the most important crops in Bangladesh in terms of agricultural
production. This edible oil plays an important role in human nutrition in our daily
life. A good number of o1] seed crop like mustard/rapeseed, groundnut, sesame,
linseed, niger, safflower, sunflower and soybean are being cultivated in Bangladesh.
The first three are considered the major oil crops. However, all oi] seed crops are
cultivated in about 3.8 lac hectares and 7.5 lac metric tons edible oil is produced in
Bangladesh (BBS, 2011). From our internal production, one-third of the total
requirement can be met up. The shortfall is met up by import at the cost of huge
amount of money per year, Bangladesh Agricultural Research Institute (BARI) and
other organization have developed a good number of high yielding varieties (HYV)
of different oil crops including some improved production technologies. If farmers
use these technologies, the internal oil seed production will be increased. Among
them, the most important oil crops in Bangladesh are described below,
lL. Mustard
[tis the main edible oil crop in Bangladesh. It ranks top in respect of area and
production among the oil crops grown in this country, Mustard oi] has been using as
cooking oil from the time immemorial. This crop is cultivated, at present.in about
2.54 lac hectares. The production is about 2.46 lac metric tons on] (BBS, 2011). The
average yield of mustard is 974 Kg/ha, Total production and per heetare seed yield of
this crop may be increased by using high yielding variety (HY V) and improved
production technologies. The different varieties of mustard seed contain 40-44% oil
and mustard oil cake contains 40% protein. Oil cake is a nutritious food items for
cattle and fish. [tis alsa a good organic fertilizer for crops, Dry mustard plants may
be used as fuel.

1.1 Varieties
A brief discussion of important popular varieties of mustard and their important
charactenistics 1s given below:
BARI Sarisha-9 (Srossica rapa) is ao short duration)
Sarisha-9 jvaricty collected from India under seed exchange
(24h) provram of SAARC technical assisiance. This line was
improved through selcetion process and performed well
in different yield trials for rabi (winter) season. Plant
height: 83-93 em; short plant stature. Number of
siliqua/plant: 80-100; Number of seeds!siliqua: |5-
20, Brown seed and 1000-seed weight: 2.5-3.(g. Seed
wield: 145-165 ha. Duration: 80-85 days.

 
atsName of
_ Varieties
BARI
Surisha-11
(2001)
Important Characteristics
BARI Sarisha- 11 (Brecsied farted) variety was collected
germplasm from home and abroad and was developed by
BARD through selection process for rabi season, Tall plant
height; (20-130 cm, Number of siliqum plant: 73-) 30
and number of seeds/siliqua: 12-15, Brown seed and
1000-seed weight: 3.3-4.0¢. Bold seed. Moderately
resistant.to Alera blight, Moderately heat and Saline
tolerant (Salinity level: 6-8 dim). Seed yheld: 2.0-2.5 wha
and Siover yield: 2.5-3.0 wha, Durations 95-100 days,
BARI Sarisha-13 (8rassica napus) is an exotic variety
named as NAP-198 line of Sweden was selected
throwgh sclection procedure. Plant height: #0-100 cm.
Waxy coating on leaf; erect type. Bold seed. Flower
yellow. Moderately waterlogmed tolermnt. OF content:
42-43% and 1O00-seed weight: 3.8-4.0¢. Seed vield:
1.77-2. 20 ha. Ditration: 90-95 days.

BARI Sorisho-14 (8rossica rapa) was developed
through a cross vaniety in 1997 from Oil Seed Centre,
BARI. This-variety is almost self compatible tyre
which helps to produce considermble yield at adverse
weather condition like fussy weather, absence of
pollinating agent and rainfall ete during flowering
slage, Short duration vanety; Plont height: 75-85 cm,
Sumber of siliqua/plant: 44-60, number of
seods'siliqua: 13-20, Erect type. Suitable for cultivation
inbetween T. aman and Bore rice, Yellow seed aod
1O0-seed weight: 3.5-3.82. Oil content: 44%, Seed
yield: 1.4-1.6 vho. Duration; 75-30 days.

BARI Sartsho-15 (Brassica rapa) vanity wus collected
germplasm from focal orca of kahalo, Bogra in 2002 and
was selected after conducting research trial for years.
Short duration viricty; Plant helght: 90-100 cm.
Number of siliqua/plant: 70-80 ond number of
seeds! siliqua: 20-22. Erect type. White Mower; yellow
geed. Ol content: 42%. Suitable for cultivation in
between T. oman and Boro nice. LiM-seed weight: 3.25-
330g. Seed yield: 1i4-1.65 ho. Duration: S085 days.

BARI Sartsha-16 (frassica jances) 1s an exotic variety
which was collected from the Netherland. This line
performed very well in respect of yield both in research
sation os Well as farmers field for rabi (winter) season.
Tall plant stuture: 175-190cm Sumber of siliqua‘plant:
130-200 ond number of seeds‘siliqua: 9-11, Moderately
resistimt to Adfernaria blight. Moderately heat and Saline
toler (salinity lewel: 6-8 S/n). Brown seed and 10dd-
seed weight: 4.74.9. Bold seeded. Seed yield: 2.0-2,2
vho. Shower vield: 3.0-3.5 vha. Duration: 105-115 days,
 
471.2 Production Technology
Land and Soil
Medium to medium high land is suitable for cultivation but loamy soil is the best for
mustard cultivation. lt can also be cultivated in clay loam and sandy loam soil.

Seed rate: 7 kg/ha
Seed treatment
Sced treatment before sowing with Captan or Vitavex-200 (2 g/kg of seeds) could be
helpful to reduce the incidence of A/rernaria blight.

Time of sowing
Mid-October to mid-November is the optimum time for mustard crop sewing in the
nonhern part of the country but where winter comes carly, mustard seeds could be
sown cartier than the other areas.

Land preparation
Land should be well prepared by 4-5 times ploughings followed by laddering. Land
should be well pulverized and free from big clods and weeds.

Sowing method
Seeding could be done both in line and broadcasting methods. In case of line sowing,
row to row distance is 30 cm and in rows seeds should be sown continuously
Fertilizers dose
The fertilizer doses of different fertilizers (kg/ha) for different varieties are as follows:
   
 
 
The above fertilizer rate may be varied depending on AEZ and fertility condition of land.

a8Fertilizer application
Fifty percent urea and full amount of other fertilizer should be broadcasted during
final ploughing. The rest amount of urea should be top dressed at 20-25 days after
emergence (DAE) of seedling i.c. before flowering.

Irrigation
Adequate soil moisture 1s required before flowering, ic. at 22-24 DAE and during
siliqua formation ie. 50-55 DAE. If soil moisture is not adequate during the said
stages, irrigation should be applied. However, light flood irrigation or hose pipe
irrigation could be applied during initial stages of crop.

1.3 Intercultural Operation
Excess seedling in the mustard field is not desirable. So, weeding cum thinning
should be done in two installments during 10-12 DAE and 18-20 DAE, respectively,
Plant population should be 50-60 per square meter, When optimum moisture
condition exists in the field after irrigation, the soil should be loosened by using small
spade or nirani.

Pest Management
Major insects and control measures:
Aphid
Control measires:
e Foliar insecticides namely Melathion 57 EC, Marshal 20 EC, Metasysiox 25 EC,
Maladan 57 EC at the rate of 2ml/litres of water is found most effective and
controlled 100% aphid population,
* Spraying of insecticide should be done at afternoon when the pollinating bees are
away from the mustard field,
1.4 Harvesting and Seed preservation
The plants are ready for harvest when 70-75% siliquae of rapeseed and mustard
become straw colour. Plants should be harvested in the morning. Crop should be
harvested at right time and carried it to the threshing floor and should be kept in
heaps for 4-5 days. After that period, plants should be sun dried for 2 to 3 days and
then threshing should be done by bullocks or by beating with a piece of wood or
bamboo stick. After cleaning, seeds should be dried for 2-3 days in the sun. When
moisture content of seed is at $-9%, seeds can be stored in the bags or a tin container
ina cool and dry place.

492. Groundnut
Groundnut is an important of! seed crop. [tis also the best edible oil seed crop. In
Bangladesh, it oceupies third place in respect of area and production. At present, in
rabi (winter) and kharif (summer) season, a total of 31.58 thousand hectares land is
under groundnut cultivation and produce 54 thousand metric tons (BBS, 2011).
Production can be increased by using high yielding variety (HYV) and improved
production technology. The crop seed contains 48-50% oil and 22-29% protein,
Although the quality of groundnut oil is superior to mustard oil but it is not popular in
this country as cooking of] because of consumption habit. It is mainly consumed as
roasted nut and as a confectionary item.

2.1 Varieties
A brief discussion of popular varieties of groundnut and some of their important
features is as follows:
aa
ii I
BARI China |This variety was developed from Dhaka-1 vartety
hadam-5  |through mutation breeding in the Oil seed Research
(1998) Centre, BARI. Plant height: 30-35 cm, Leaves light
green. Hairy at lower surface and edge of leaf. Pod
rough, wavy and veins prominent. Seeds light brown in
colour and bigger in size. 100-seed weight: 50-5452.
Seed dormancy two weeks. Nat yield: 2.7-3.0 wha.
Duration; 135-150 days for mbi (winter) and 115-125
days for Khor? (summer) season,
This variety was selected through different exotic
varieties, Plant height: 35-40 om. Leaves green. Pod
smooth, soft, whitish, Seeds brown in colour and bigger
insize. LO0-seed weight: 50-542. Nut yield: 2.5-3.0
Cho. Duration: 140-150 davs for abi (winter) and 120-
130 days for Khan (summer) season.

It is an exotic germplasm collected from ICRISAT,
Hyderabad. India, Plant height: 38-45 om.Pod smowth,
eolt, Whilish and nomber of pods/plant: 20-25. Leaves
green, Seed size large, brown in colour, 100-seed
welght: 32-582. Mosherely tolerant to leaf spot andinast,
fess aphid infestation. Of content: 49-51%, Nut yield:
2.8-3.4 tha, Duration: 140-155 days for rabi (winter)
and 130-140 days for kharif (summer) season.Name of
Important Characteristics
BART China |This variety was developed from collected gennplasm
oF ICRISAT, India. Plant height: 33-42 cm, Leaves
light green, Pod smooth, sof, whitish and number af
pods!plant: 20-25. Cluster pod bearing. Seed size large
and brown in colour. 100-seed weight: 42-45¢.
Shelling (%0): 70-75. Off content: 49-50%. Nut vield:
2.5-2.7 tha. Duration; (40-150 days for mobi (winter)
anid 125-140 days for khan (summer) season.

BARI China |It is asclection variety which was collected from
badam-9 = |germplasm of ICRISAT, Hyderabad, India. Plant
(2010) height: 40-45 om. Leaves light green. Pod sofl, whitish
ind number of pods'plant: 20-25, Cluster pod bearing.
Sced size medium, LO0-seed welght: 45-30¢. O11
content: 48-30%, Shelling (a): 74. Nut viele: 25-25
Uha. Duration: 140-150 days for rabi (winter) and 120-
130 days for khonf (summer) season.

 
2.2 Production Technology
Land and Soil
Sandy loam and sandy soil of char area (river bank) are suitable for groundnut
cultivation. Soil should be soft and loose, so gynophores of groundnut Mower can
easily penetrate the soil and go down to form nuts.

Seed rate
Seed rate depends on germination percentage. However, 95-110 kg/ha is optimum.

Seed treatment
Pre-sowing seed treatment with Vitavax 200 (2-3 g/kg of seed) or Agrason (4 mg/kg
of seed) could reduce the disease infestation.

Time of sowing
Groundnut could be cultivated both in rabi (winter) and kharif (summer) seasons in
Bangladesh. In the rabi season, mid October to mid November is the optimum time of
sowing while July-August is the best time for sowing groundnut during kharif-!l
(Summer) season,
Land preparation
Soils of char area are very loose, so it requires 3-4 ploughings followed by ladderings
are sufficient. Irrigation and drainage system could be developed by making canals
after final ploughing and laddering.Sowing method
Seeds should be planted in rows, In general, row to row distance is 30 cm and plant to
plant distance is 15 em for all the varieties except Tridana variety (DM-1) where row
to row distance is 25 cm and plant to plant distance 10 em. Seeds should be placed at
2-3 cm depth of soil,
Fertilizer dose and application method
Groundnut plant itself fixes atmosphere nitrogen, So, the requirement of urea for this
erop is very low. However, the fertilizer dose is Urea: 25-30; TSP: 150-170; MP: 80-
90; Gypsum: 160-180; Zine sulphate: 4-5 and Boric acid: 9-11 kg/ha, respectively,
All fertilizers should be applicd before final land preparation.

Irrigation
There is no need of irrigation in the soil of char area but in the high land where soil
becomes dry quickly are required one or two imigations. In khanf-1 (summer; March-
June) season, one irrigation should be required depending on the field condition but
in kharif-11 (summer: July-November) season, there ts no need of irrigation.
Drainage may be needed to drain oul excess water.

2.3 Intercultural Operation
Pest Management
Major insects and control measures
Major insects: Hairy caterpillar, Jassids and Thriphs
Control measures:
* Incase of hairy caterpillar insect infestation, leaves of infested plant should be
destroyed along with the eggs and larvac of insects.

* For adult insect control, Ripcord 10 EC or Nogos 100 EC should be sprayed (@
one ml of insecticide with one litre of water.

« Diazinon #0) EC (a 2 ml per litres of water should be sprayed to control Jassids and thnphs.

2.40 Harvesting and Seed preservation
When plants become mature, the leaves of the lower parts of plants become yellow,
Surface of pods become rough and hard, veins become prominent, inner surface of
pods shell becomes blackish in colour. Cover of kermels become brown in colour,
These are the ideal condition when the crop is ready for harvest.

Pods should be dried for 8 hours after harvesting. Moisture content of pods should be
§-9%, Seeds should be cooled and then stored after sun drying. For storing
eroundnut, different types of containers may be used. [f seeds are stored in air tight
condition whether polythene bags and synthetic bags, the quality of seeds and
viability of seeds are restored for more than one year bul during rainy season, seeds
should be checked and dried and kept in the same container.

323, Sesame
Sesame is the second most important edible oil crop in Bangladesh, It contains 5.3%
water, 5.2% minerals, 2.9% fibre, 43.3% fat and 25% carbohydrate per 100g edible
portion. At present, this crop is cultivated in about 80 thousand hectares of land and
produces about 49 thousand metne tons. [tis grown both in khanf (summer) and nabi
(winter) season. But in this country, sesame is mostly grown in kharif scason. It is
grown almost in all regions of Bangladesh. Generally, black and brown coloured
sesame seeds are cultivated in this country. The sesame seeds contain 42-45% oi] and
20% protein. At precent, it occupies 34.8 thosandhectares of land and produces 31
thousand metric tons with an average yield of this crop is R89 Ke/ha (BBS, 2011).
But it could be possible to increase sesame production upto 1200 Ke/ha through
improved management practices.

3.1 Varieties
The popular varieties of sesame developed by BARI and their important features are
described below:
BARI TiS | This variety was developed through selection procedure},
(2001) = | from collection of local different germplasm of sesame
for kharif (summer) season. Plant height: 100-120
em. Stem, leaves hairy. Brown seed colour, Flower
white with violet shading. Number of capsules/plant:
M-65. Number of seceds/capsules: 30-35. Seed vield:
1.2<1.4vta. Dirathon: 9-100 days:
BARI THA | This variety was developed through selection process
(2K) from local germplasms. li gave good performances
during khant (summer) scason. Plant height: 40-120
cm. Most of the pods: &-chambered. Brown seed
colour. Sumber af capsules! plant: 85-90. Number of
seeds/eapsules: 75-77, Seed yield: |.4-1.5 t/ha,
Duration: 90-95 dows.

 
4.2 Production Technology
Land and Soil
Sandy loam along with high land is the best suitable for sesame cultivation but it
could not survive in water logging condition.

Seed rate: 7 kg/ha
aSeed treatment
Seeds should be treated with fungicide before sowing because seeds often bear
discases pathogens which hamper seedling growth and development, So, seed
treatment is very important for maintaining normal plant growth and healthy
seedling. Vitavex-200, Bavistin, Captan and Homai should be used as for seed
treatment. A big container with lid could be used for seed treatment. Fungicide (@ 2
e/ke of seeds or any other recommended rate should be used, Seeds should be sown
on the following day after proper mixing.

Time of sowing
For kharif-1] season, the optimum sowing time 1s end of February to middle of Apnl
and for autumn crop the optimum sowing time is mid August to mid September.
However fork harif-1 (summer) season, carly sowing is advocated for sesame
cultivation te achieve higher yielkd.

Land preparation
Land should be prepared by 4-5 times ploughing followed by laddenng. Land should
be free from big clods and weeds. Land should be levelled, and drains should be
made for casy drainage of excess rain or irrigation water, In the raised bed system,
drainage of excess water could easily be controlled,
Sowing method
In case of line sowing, line to line distance is 30 cm and seeds are sown continuously
in line whileafter emergence, plant to plant distance should be kept at 5cm,
Fertilizer dose and application method
Fertilizer dose varies depending on soil fertility and also differs in different agro-
ecological zones (AEZ), However, fertilizer dose for sesame crop is Urea: 100-125;
TSP: 130-150; MP: 40-50; Gypsum; 10-110; Zine sulphate: 0-5 and Borie acid: §-10
kasha, respectively. Fifty percent urea and full dose of other fertilizers should be
applied at the time of final ploughing. The rest amount of urea should be top dressed
al 25-30 days after sowing tc. before flowering. Adequate soil moisture is necessary
during top dressing.

Irrigation
Generally, wrigation is net required for sesame cultivation, But for kharif-|] erop,
irrigation may be required at initial stage of the crop because of late rain. So, one
Irrigation would be required before flowering at 25-30 days afier sowing. Sesame
erop could not tolerate water logging. So, irrigation water or rain water should be
drained out by making drains in the field immediately after irrigation or rainfall,
544.3 Intercultural Operation
Excess plants should be thinned out at 10 days after germination keeping 50-60 plants
per square meter. In case of line sowing, the excess weeds from the ficld should be
removed at 10-15 DAE and another at 20-25 days after sowing.

Pest Management
Major insects and Control measures:
Hairy caterpillar
Control measures:
® Alsan S50EC | ml in | litre of water should be mixed and sprayed to control hairy
caterpillar.

« Alsan 50EC, Cilicron S0EC, Desis 25EC may also be used at the rate of | ml in |
litre of water for controlling eggs of the insect,
3.4 Harvesting and Seed preservation
Sesame plants mature within 85-90 days, All capsules do not mature at a time. Plants
should be harvested before drying of capsules. Harvested plants should be kept in
heaps for 3-4 days. The plants should be dried in the sun for few days and then
threshing should be done. Seeds should be dried for 2-3 days in the sun, When
moisture content of seed is at $-9% then seeds should be stored in the bags or a tin
container ina cool and dry place.

aeIV. PULSE CROPS
All the pulses belong to Papilionaceae group of botanical family Leguminosae, Pulses
are the most common item in the daily diet of the people of Bangladesh. Being the
cheapest source of protein, pulses are, in fact, poor mens meat and are eaten freely as
a substitute for animal protein which is extremely expensive. Pulse not only contain
lot of protein comparable with meat in terms of quantity, but have higher energy value
than meat and contain much more of minerals, such as, calcium, phosphorus and iron.
The production of pulse crops in Bangladesh is far below requirement. At present,
pulses are grown on area of 2.54 lac hectares with total prodwetion of 2.33 lac metric
tons (BBS, 2011). The average yield of pulses are 900 ke/ha, In order to meet pulse
requirement of the present population, production must be increased through increase
of areas, using of high yielding varieties and application of improved production
technologies, The most important pulse crops are described below,
1. Lentil
Lentil is essentially a temperate crop but it is adapted to cooler regions of the sub-
tropics. It isa very suitable for production as sole crop and intererop. In Bangladesh,
itis sown as rabi (winter) crop on residual soil moisture. Lentil is somewhat drought
tolerant but susceptible to water logging, [tis the most important pulse crop in
Bangladesh, Generally, farmers cultivate locally popular variety of lentil in broadcast
method. The yield level of this variety is very low, However, al present the area of
lentil is 83 thousand hectare with total production of $0,000 metric tons (BBS, 2011).

1.1 Varieties
A brief discussion of popular BARI varieties and their important characteristics is
given below.

This variety was introduced from ICARDA, Syria.
Plant height: 40-45 om. Resistant to stemphylium
blight and rust, Protein: 25.80%, CHO: 34 80%,
Cooking Time: 12 min, Head Dhal yield: 88.55%,
LO00-seed weight: 19.5-200. Seed vield: 2.0 t/ha,
Duration: | 1-113 days,
This variety was introduced from ICARDA, Syria.
Medium plant stature, Plant height; 38-40 em,
Resistant to Stemphylium blight and rust. Tolerant to
foot ro and modreraicly resistant to aphid. Protein:
26%, CHO: 59.80%, Cooking Time: 12 min, Head
Dhal vield: 75%. (000-seed weight: 199, Seed vield:
L.3- 2.2 Uha. Duration: 98-110 days.This vanity was introduced from ICARDA, Syria. Plant
helght: 40-45 em, Resistant to Stemphy liom blight and
rust. Protein: 26%, CHO: 55.9%, Head hal vield:
THs. Cooking Time: 12 min. 1000-seed weight: 148y.
Seed yield: 1.6-2.5ho. Deration: 110-115 days.

This variety was introduced from ICARDA, Syria. Plant
height: 32-35 em. Tolerant to Stemphylium blight and
rust. Protein: 26%, CHO: $8.9%. Head Dhal vield:
THs. Cooking Time: 12 min. 1000-seed weight: 23-
23g. Seed wleld: 18-23 tho, Duration: | 15-120 days
 
1.2 Production Technology
Land and Soil
ltmay be grown inall types of well drained soils. Lentil prefers full sunny
environments, loose, organic matter rich well drained soil, It grows best in slightly
acidic soil with pH 6.0-6.5. Loam and clay loam soils are suitable for lentil.

Seed rate
It requires 30-35 kg seeds for one hectare of land,
Seed treatment
Seed should be treated before sowing by provex (a) 2 g/kg of seed for successful crop
production.

Time of sowing
The optimum sowing time is last week of October to first week of November (10
November) but it could be sown upto end of November,
Land preparation
Land should be well prepared by 3-4 times ploughing followed by cross laddering.
Land should well pulvenzed and free from big clods and weeds.

Sowing method
Seeding could be done both in broadcasting and line sowing method. In case of line
sowing, row to row distance is 25 cm and in rows seed should be sown continuously,
Fertilizer application
Urea, TSP, MP and Boric acid should be applied (@ 44, 100, 40 and 7.5 kg/ha,
respectively during final land preparation.

Irrigation
The crop normally grows under rainfed condition but if necessary, one irrigation is to
be given al vegetative stage.

571.3 Intercultural Operation
Weeding should be done at 25-30 days after emergence.

Pest Management
Major diseases and control measures:
Stemphylium blight
Stemphylium blight start with the appearance of small pin-headed light brown to tan
coloured spots on leaflets. Under ideal conditions the small spots enlarge rapidly,
covering the entire leaflet surface within a 2-3 day period. The infected tissue appears
light cream in colour, often with angular J .
patterns of lighter and darker areas that
spread across, or long, the entire leaflet. The
affected foliage and stems gradually turn dull
yellow, giving a blighted appearance to the
crop. The infected leaves can be abseised
rapidly, leaving only the terminal leaflets on Stemphylium blight of lentil
the stems. The stems bend down, dry and gradually turn ashy white, but pods remain
green. White mycelial growth can sometimes be-seen on the infected stems.

   
Control measures:
« Being stubble-bome disease strategies such as destruction of old crop residues,
and crop rotation would assist in decreasing potential inoculum sources,
® The most economical and sustainable strategies to control Stemphylium blight are
through use of resistant/tolerant variety (BARIMasur-4, BARIMasur-5,
BARI Masur-6 and BARIMasur-7).

e Delay sowing reduces the incidence of Stempiy sive blight disease of lentil but it
reduces ihe pod setting and lowering the seed yield significantly.

« Application of Rovral (Iprodion) 40 WP (0.2%) or Secure 600 WG (Penamidone +
Mancoszeb), Companion( Mancogeb+Canendazim) performs better to control the
disease effectively when sprayed 3 times alan interval of 10 days starting from the
initiation of the disease.

* Integrated Disease Management include the use of healthy seed and Secure 600
WG spray with wider spacing (40 cm) performed higher yield through lower
disease incidence.

Foot rot
Foot rot occurs in the field as patches of
dead plants, most offen al the seedling
stage. The pathogen attacks the collar
region of the plant causing slight yellows
brown discoloration and rotting of the
tissue. The young seedling shows damping Foot rot dikeaze of lentil
 
a8off symptom, The infected crop become chlorotic, quickly dies and dries up. The
pathogens are soil borne and incidence of the disease has been observed to be higher
in soil with initially high moisture content.

Control measures:
e Use of tolerant vanety (BARIMasur-5, BARIMasur-6 and BARIMasur-7),
® Seed treatment with Provax-200 (@) 0.25% wiw of dry seed,
* Changing the seeding date and tillage method was found effective to reduce the
incidence of diseases. Optimum sowing al the beginning of November found betier
throughout the couniry.

e Soil treatment with Trichoderma spp. and/or Rivzabivn spp. moculum fe) 210 g/ha
showed better result against foot and root rot,
Rust
Rust starts with the formation of yellowish- :
white pycnidia and accial cups on the lower ‘ afl
surface of leaflets and on pods, singly or in
small groups ina circular form. Later,
 
brown uredial pustules emerge on cither "
surface of leaflets, stem and pods. Pustules jaggy
are oval to circular and upto | mmin Rust disease of lentil
diameter, They may coulesce to form larger pustules, The telia, which are formed late
in the season, are dark brown to black, elongated and present mainly on branches and
sloms. In severe infections leaves are shed and plants dry prematurely, the affected
plant dries without forming any seeds in pods or with small shriveled seeds. The plant
has a dark brown to blackish appearance, visible in affected patches of the paddock or
in the whole paddock if totally infected.

Control measures:
« Use of tolerant variety (BART Masur-5, BAR] Masur-6 and BARI Masur-7),
* Inthe northern districts of Bangladesh, the diseases occur at the end of February.
The disease can be avoided by selecting early maturing varieties like BARI Masur-
I as well as by adjusting sowing date 1.c. by the first week of November in the
northern and last week of October in the southern parts of the country.

® Seed treatment with Provax-200 fa) 0.25% wiw of dry sced as well as protective
foliar spray with Tilt (Propiconazel) 250 EC (0.05%) performed well.

® Integrated Disease Management includes use of healthy seed + tolerant variety +
Seed treatment + Tilt spray + wider spacing (40cm).

Major insects and control measures:
Aphid (4phis craccivera Koch)
Aphid is the key pest of lentil in the field condition. It injures lentils mostly by
direct feeding. Direct feeding by the insect includes sucking sap from leaves, stems,
59blossoms and pods, Plants heavily fed upon are
stunted and produce fewer and smaller pods and
seeds, Smaller plants may dic, Normally 10-15% yield
malty be lost by aphid infestation.

Control measures:
* To control aphid infestation avotd late sowing, if
late, completely avoid mixed crop with mustard.
Yellow pan trap can control aphid, which is made
by soap dust mixed with water in yellow pan.

e Conserve natural enemies (Lady beetle, syrphid fly ete.) in the crop field by
minimum or no use of insecticides for the enhancement of biological control.

* Spraying of detergent (Jet powder (@ 5 2/| water) or neem sced extract (@) $0 g/l at
5-7 days interval,
« Incase of severe infestation, Melathion 57 EC or Dimethoate 40 EC (@ 2 ml/l can
be sprayed twice at 7 days interval,
   
Aphid of Lentil
Pod Borer (Helicoverpa armigera Hubner)
The young larvae feed on the chlorophyll of young leaves and skeletinize it. During
the podding stage the larvae bore inside the pod by making hole and then feed on the
developing grain.

Control measures:
® Hand picking of young larvae should be killed and removed from the plot,
« Install Bird perches ¢2 50/ha would be required.

« Spray insecticides like Lambda-Cyhalothrin (Karate 2.5 EC or Reeva 2.5 EC) fa |
mill of water.

L4 Harvesting and Seed preservation
There are two ways to harvest the crop. One is, when almost all the pods turned
brown, the plants may be pulled out and another one is to cutat the ground level with
asickle, then drying in the field or on the threshing floor. When the plants and pods
dry then brittle with a stick, Often, cattle or power thresher are allowed to trample on
the plants to thresh the pods, Seeds should be cleaned by winnowing, which is
generally done by tossing the produce in the air with forks on a windy day.

Seed preservation
Lentil should be properly stored because seed is vulnerable to heavy insect damage.
The seeds should be cleaned, dried thoroughly in sun and moisture content should be
lowered down to §-9 %. Then seeds should be cooled and kept either in sealed
polythene bags along with naphthalene balls covered by jute bags, tin containers or
air light earthen pots in store rooms, Finally, seed should be stored in dry and above
ground place,
ful)2. Mungbean
Mungbean (Pigme radiata L, Wilezek) belongs to the family leguminosae. This is one
of the important pulse crop in Bangladesh. ft contributes only about 11.53% of the
total pulse production. It ranks fifth among the pulse crops. It is a crop of the tropics
and sub-tropics which requires a warm temperature regime. The optimum
temperature ranges from 20°- 35°C depending upon season, [is a rich source of
protein and several essential micronutrients, It contains 24.5% protein, and $9,9%
carbohydrate. lt also contains 735 mg calcium, 8.5 mg iron, and 49 mg B-Carotene per
100 ¢ of split dual. The foliage and stem are also a good source of fodder for
livestock as well as a green manure. Like other leguminous crop, the crop can fix
almospherie nitrogen and improves soil fertility and fits well in many cropping
system because of its short maturity period, In Bangladesh, mungbean is grown in
area of 27.6 thousand hectares with total production of 19.0 thousand tons with an
average of 690 ke/ha (BBS, 2011). But the production is extremely insufficient
compared to its requirement. To fulfill the demand of the country, the area and
production of the crop needs to be expanded, The varieties and their important
characteristics are presented below.

2.1 Varieties
This vanity was introduced from Philippine (M-77 13).
Plant height: 45-52 em. Tolerant to YMV and CLS.
Plate Insensitive. Protein: 22.56%, CHO: 46, 14%,
Head hal yield: 76.1%. Cooking Time: 15 min,
LO0-seedweipht: 25.33¢. Seed vield: |, 1-1.35 tha,
Duration: 65-70) days
This variety was developed from crossing between
Alumg-3 Sona mung und BART Mung-2. Plant height: 30-
(1944) 53cm, Tolerant to YMV and CLS Photo Insensitive,
Protein: 20.81%, CHO: 49.53%. Head dhal Vield:
67.5%, Cooking Time: 13 min, 1000-seed weight:
2o.4o. Soce yhelel: §0-1.3 tho, Duration: 60-65 days
This variety was developed from local cross (BMX
B4LI20). Plant height; $2-57 em. Resistant to YMY¥
med CLS. Phota insensitive. Protein: 23.1%, CHO:
5).32%. Head dhal Vield: 63%, Cooking Times 17
min, 100-seed weight: 31.9¢. Seed Vield: .1-1,30ha,
Duration: 6-65 days
 
olThis variety wis introduced from AV ROK (NM. 92),
Plant height: 41-46 cm, Resistant to VYMV and CLS.
Photo Insensitive. Protein: 20.93%, CHO: 49.46%,
Head dhal Vield: 68%. Cooking Time: [8 min, Quite
Synchrony in maturiiy. 1O00-seed weight: 41.9%.
Secdvield: (40-145 wha, Duration: 38-0 days
This vartety was introduced fram AVRDKC (NM- 94),
Medium plant stature. Plant height: 40-45 cm, Resistant
to YM and CLS, Phote Insensitive, Bold seed size with
green seed coat, Protelin: 21.2%; CHO: 46.8%, Head
dhal Vield: 67.2%, Cooking Time: 1% min. Synchrony
in maturity and late potentiality, Recommended for
cultivationin in Jessore, Khulna, Fortdpur, Poboa,
Rajshahi and Dinajpur. (000-seed weight: 400g. Seed
yield: 1.3 —1,6 tha, Duration: 55-60 days
  
   
  
  
 
   
   
   
   
  
 
 
 
 
2.2 Production Technology
Land and Soil
ht may be grown in all types of lands with well drained soils but it prefers medium
high land and well drained loamy soil and does not tolerate water logged condition, It
prefers slightly in acidic to neutral soil with P46.2-7.2.

Seed rate
20 ke for small seeded and 25 kg for bold seeded are required for one hectare of land.

Seed treatment
Seed should be treated before sowing by provex (a) 2 g/ke of seed for successful crop
production.

Time of sowing
The optimum sowing time for kharif-1 season is last February through mid March
and for kKharif-I] season is first August through last September. But mungbean crop
could be grown in late rabi (winter) from mid January through mid February,
particularly in the areas of Souther region.

Land preparation
Land should be well prepared by 2-3 times ploughing followed by cross laddering.
Land should be well pulverized and free from big clods and weeds,
Sowing method
Seeding could be done both in broadcasting and line sowing method. In case of line
sowing, row to row distance is 30 cm and in rows seed to seed distance §-10 cm.

feFertilizer application
Urea, TSP, MP and Boric acid should be applied fa) 44, 100, 40 and 7.5 kg/ha,
respectively during final land preparation.

Irrigation
In Khanf-] season, before sowing the soil is to be irrigated to ensure germination, If
moisture is needed, water should be supplied during cropping season.

2.3 Intercultural Operation
Weeding should be done at 20-25 days alter emergence.

Pest Management
Major diseases and control measures:
Out of 20 diseases recorded in Mungbean, 12 are caused by fungi, 2 by nematode, 5
by virus/mycoplasma and | by bacterial disease, So far, two diseases viz. MY MY,
Cercospora leaf spot and powdery mildew are the major ones. Recently, Sclorotina
blight is also appearing as a major disease. These are evenly distributed all over the
growing zones,
Yellow Mosaic Virus (VMV)
YMV causes irregular yellow and green patches in older leaves and complete
yellowing in young leaves of susceptible variety. Affected plants produces fewer
flowers and pods, Pods often develop mottling, remain small and contain fewer and
smaller seeds. In baleckgram two 5
symptom “yellow mottle” and
“necrotic motte” can be distinguished.

Control measures:
* The most economic and sustainable
method to control YM are through
use of resistant/tolerant variety Yellow mosaic viras
(BARI Mung-5 and BARI Mung-6) along with cultural practices includes rouging
of virus infected plant and alternate hosis. Adjustment of sowing date is an
essential approach in reducing the incidence of YMV through escaping the disease.

® Foliar sprays with Admire 200 SL (Imidachlorpid) @ 0.25 mil/litre, 2 to 3 times 7-
10 days interval at the first sign of discase,
 
Cercospora leaf spat
The disease is recognized by the
appearance of leaf spots that are
circular to irregular shape with grayish
white centers and reddish brown to
dark brown margins, The initial
symptoms of the disease appear as Cereospora leaf spot
 
63water soaked spots on leaves, As spots become older they turn reddish or brown
around the circumference with grey or white ceners. Many spots may coalesce
together causing an enlarged dead arca on the infected leaves, Heavy infection of
eerospore can cause mungbean plant prematurely dry and defoliated_
Control measurers:
* Use of tolerant variety (BARI Mung-6 and BARI Mash-2)
® Crop debris of virus infected plant and altemate hosts weed hosts should also be
removed at the time of planting.

« Systemic fungicides Bavistin 70 WP (Carbendazim) at 2g/lis found effective to
control the disease.

Powdery Mildew
The disease appears first on leaves as powdery masses, which
later tum dirty white. Symptoms appear on pods, stems and
branches. Powdery mildew occurs under cool temperature
(20-26°C) and is favoured by cloudy weather, lt can cause up
to 40% yield loss. In the carly stage, the disease appears as
light yellowish irregular spots on leaves which turn brown
quickly. A powder mass grows over the spots covering the
entire leaf surface. Powdery Mildew
 
Control measurers:
® Planting of resistant/tolerant cultivars (BARI Mung-6 and BARI Mash-2
moderately resistant).

e Mid September sowing is suitable for avoiding the disease,
* Foliar spray (2-3 times) with tilt 250EC (0.1%) or Thiovit 80 WP (0.2%) at 12-15
days interval.

Major insect and control measurers:
Stem fly (Ophiomyia phaseali)
The adult females puncture the leaves with the help of their
avipositors for feeding and oviposition, Soon afer hatching
the larvae enters the nearest vein, move into the petiole and
down to the stems: feed inside it and finally tunnels the main
sem even up to roots. The affected plants have stunted growth
and poor yield. The stems both the above and below ground
level shows cracking, browning and swelling. In cases of
heavy infestation, many plants dic.

Control measurers:
e Clean cultivation like timely weeding cum thinning can suppress the pest.

« Intercropping of companion crops like maize, brinjal and groundnut in mungbean
reduce 25 to 31% plant infestation over sole crop.

 
Stemfly it tvungbean stem
fe* Seed treatment with carbofuran (Furadan 5G) a 40g/kg followed by foliar
application of Dimethoate (a) 2 m/l at 30 days afier sowing is found effective.

Flea Beetles
Two types of fea beetles viz, Crucifer Nea beetle and
stripped flea beetles attacks mungbean severely. The larvae
live in the soil and fed upon the roots of the host plants, The
adults feed on the cotyledons and leaves of young plants
making innumerable round holes. The older damaged leaves
dry up and the plant is rendered with few pads.

 
Control measurers: Flea bectles
* Removal and destruction of weeds,
* Spraying should be done with Dimethoate (Tufgor 40 EC) or Carbosulfan
(Marshal 20 EC) (@) 2mMitter of water from the 1* incidence of the pest.

Jassid (Amraxcabiguttula)
Both nymphs and adults of jassids suck plant sap. As a !
result of their severe attack, the leaves curl, turn pale and ———
become bronze. The leaves ultimately become dry.

Control measurers
® Conservalion of natural enemies, Jossid with infested plant
* Incase of heavy infestation, Dimethoate (Tufgor 40 EC.) can be sprayed (a) 2mll of water.

Whitely (Bemisiatabaci)
Nymphs and adults suck sap from the leaves which lowers
vitality of the plants. Sooty mould develops on affected
leaves and the affected plants look sick. The growth of crap ~ sah Cee
is stunted when the whitefly attack is severe,
 
   
Control measurers: Wakely
* Remove and destroy of heavily infested leaves to reduce insect population.
® This pest can be controlled by spraying Dimethoate (Tufgor 40 EC) (@ 2 m/l water.

Hairy caterpillar, Spifesama obfiqua
The caterpillars feed voraciously on the green portion of the
leaves and make it net like in appearance. The infested
leaves dry up. In case of heavy infestation plant may dic.

 
Control measurers:
* Hand pick the infested leaves with aggregated young
larvae and destroy the caterpillars,
* Spray insecticides like Lambda-Cyhalothrin (Karate 2,5 EC/ Reeva 2.5 EC) @ |
mill of water.

Hairy caterpillar
65Leaf folder
Larvae fold the leaves and cat the green surface. Infested val
leaves dry up or even plant may dic. :
Control measurers
* Remove the folded leaves with larva and destroy.

# Spray Cypermethrin (Ripcord 10 EC) (i 1 m/l of water,
Hawk moths (4eherontia spp.)
The caterpillars feed voraciously on leaves and defoliate the plants causing heavy damage.

Control measurers
® Install bird perches,
* Deep ploughing exposes the pupae for predation to insectivorous birds.

® Hand picking and destruction of caterpillars,
® Spray insecticides like Lambda-Cyhalothrin (Karate 2.5 EC/ Reeva 2.5 EC) fa 1
mill of water.

Aphid (Aphis eraccivera Koch)
Aphid injures mungbean mostly by direct feeding, Direct
feeding by the insect includes sucking sap from leaves, |
stems, blossoms and pods. Plants heavily fed upon are ~
stunted and produce no or fewer and smaller pods and
sceds. Smaller plants may dic.

 
Control measurers: Aphid
* Conserve natural enemies (Lady beetle, Syrphid fly ete.) in the crop field by
Minimum one use of insecticides for the enhancement of biological control.

« Spraying of detergent (Jet powder (@) 5g/] water) or neem seed extract (a) 30g/l at
5-7 days interval.

« [n case of severe infestation, Malathion 487 EC or Dimethoate 40 EC fa) 2 mill can
be sprayed twice at 7 days interval,
Thrips (Wegalurothrips distalis)
Thrips may attack mungbean in both seedling and flowering
stages. In seedling stage it attacks when trifoliate leaves form.
lt is the major cause of yield loss in mungbean, particularly in
the Nowering and pod formation stages. Infested flower drops
and damaged buds may also be shed before the Mowers open.
Pod production is low and pods are deformed.

   
Control measurers: i
® Install white sticky trap. Thrips affected
* Spray of Imidachloprid (Admire 200 SL/ Imitaf 20 SL) (@ 0.5 mil/litre of water at
100% flowenng and 100% podding stage,
fotPod Borer complex (.Woruca sp, / Helicoverpa sp / Gram blue, Enclrrysaps)
The young larvae feed on the chlorophyll of young leaves
and skeletinize it, During the podding stage, the larvae bore
inside the pod by making hole and then feed on the
developing grain.

Control measurers:
Install bird perches (a) S0/ha.
Hand picking of larvae.
Install pheromone traps ata distance of 10m apart to kill moth population,
Sequential release of eggs and larval parasitoids (Trichagrantna and Braco).
Spray recommended insecticides at 100% podding stage and seed developing
slage can effectively control pod borer,
 
Bruchids (Caffosobruchus spp.)

The adult and grub feed on the grain by making a small hole. Infested stored seed can
be recognized by the white egg#s on the seed surface and the round exit holes with the
‘Hap’ of seed coal.

Control measurers
® Before preservation, seeds should be well dried. Preservation should be done in an
air tight container.

e Using | phostoxin tablets for every 50 kg seeds in an air tight container can keep
the stored seed for about one year without infestation,
2.4 Harvesting and Seed preservation
Crop should be harvested at 55-70 DAE, depending upon growing season and variety.
In Kharif-1 and Late rabi season pod should be picked after it become blackish in
colour. But in Khanf-(] season plants should be harvested as. in bentil/chickpea.

Mungbean should be properly stored because seed 1s vulnerable to heavy insect
damage. The seeds should be cleaned, dried thoroughly in sun and moisture content
should be below &—9 % then seeds should be cooled and kept cither in sealed
polythene bags along with naphthalene balls covered by jute bags, tin containers or
air tight earthen pots in store rooms, Finally, seed should be stored in dry and above
the ground place.

674. Chickpea
Chickpea (Gram) is o temperte crop and well adapted to sub-tropical condition, It is
highly sensitive to excess moisture, high humidity and cloudy weather which affect its
flowering and pod setting. Chickpea is a cool season annual crop and prefers diumal
eyele of cool (17.8°- 21° C) mghts and warm (21°- 26.7° C) days. It can not withstand
heavy rains and does not grow well in wet regions. They produce good yields in drier
condition because of their tap root, High yield and quality seeds are obtained from
areas having lighter and well distributed rainfall patterns. However, at present the area
of Chickpea is 8,097 hectares with total production of 7000 metric tons (ABS, 2011).

3.1 Varieties
Important Characteristics
BARI Flant type: Medium erect. Flower colour: Pink. Seed)”
Chhola-3 |calour: Brown, BGM tolerant, Protein content (%): 25.2. |),
(193) LMbO-sced weight: [S0-190¢. Seed yield: 1.8-1.9 t/ha.);
Durathon: 113-125 days
Plint type: Spreading. Flower colour: Pink. Seed colour:
Brown, BGM tolerant. Protein content (%): 21. 1O00-seed
welght: 110-[20¢. Seed yield: |.7-1.8 ha. Duration: | 13-
125 days.

BARI Plant type: Semi spreading. Flower colour: Pink, Seed) ea
Chhola-6 = jcolour: Brown. BOM tolerant, Protein content (%.):)§
(16) 19.42%. More suitable for late sowing 1000-seed weight: |2
160-1 70g. Seed yleld: 2.5-2,6 vha. Duration: |25-[30 days.

Plant type: Medium orect. Flower colour: Pink. Seed
colour: Brown. BGM tolerant, Protein content (0): 25.2. |
More suitable for Harind region 1000-seed weight: | 80- |e
Ig. Seed yield: 1.8-1.4 vha. Duoratlon: 113-125 days. us!

BARI Plant type: Erect. Plont height: 55-60 em. Flower colour:
Chhola-9 | Pink. Seed colour: Brown. BOM tolerint. Pod per plant:
(2001) 53-00, Protein content (%): 19.4. 1000-seed weight: 130-
220g. Seed vield: 1.9-2.61ha Duration: 125-1 3odays
 
3.2 Production Technology
Land andsoil
Loam and clay loam soils are suitable for chickpea cultivation. It can be grown on
soils having PYrange of 6.0-9.0 although it is sensitive to salinity and alkalinity.
Chickpea grows in fertile sandy loam and well drained soils,
Seed rate
40-45 ke seeds are required for one hectare of land.

Seed treatment
Seed should be treated before sowing by provex (@ 2 g/kg of seed for good harvest.

beTime of sowing
In most parts of the country, the optimum sowing time is November 20 ta December
07 and for Barind region the optimum sowing time 18 last week of October to first
week of November.

Land preparation
Chickpea does not require fine land preparation but it needs 2-3 ploughings with
eross laddering for land preparation.

Sowing method
Seeding could be done in both broadcasting and line sowing method, In case of line
sowing, row to row distance is 40-50 cm and in rows seed to seed distance 10-15 em,
Fertilizer application
Urea, TSP, MP.and Boric acid should be applied (@ 20, 100, 40 and 7.5 kg/ha,
respectively during final land preparation,
Irrigation
Chickpea normally grows in rainfed condition but in Barind region, one irrigation
during vegetative stage is effective.

3.3 Intercultural Operation
Weed should be controlled at 30-35 days after emergence.

Pest Management
Diseases of chickpea:
Qut of 17 diseases recorded in chickpea, 12 causes by fungi, 3 by virus/mycoplasma and
2 by nematode. So far, three diseases viz, Borrviis grey Mola, Collar rot and Fusarium
Wilt are the major ones, These are evenly distributed all over the growing zones.

Major diseases and Control measures:
Botrvtis Gray Mold (BGM) of chickpea
The fungus survives up to 5 years on the seed if stored at
18°C, The viability of the fungus on sced fs influenced by
relative humidity. High relative humidity (95%) with
temperature between 20-25"C for several hours during the
day ant a dense canopy are the most favourable for infection
and rapid spread of the disease, Excessive vegetative growth
duc to too much irrigation or rain, close spacing and varicti¢s 3634 infested plant and seed
that have a dense canopy favour disease development.

 
Initial symptom ofthe fungus forms grey or brown to light brown lesions on the leaflets,
branches, and pods. The infected portion is covered with ereet hairy sporophores giving
a mouldy appearance, The growing twigs and flowers are particularly susceptible to
infection. Lesions on stem are 10-30 mm long and stem are girdled completely. Tender
fibranches break off al the point where the grey mould has caused rotting. Affected
leaves and flowers turn into a rotting mass. Lesions on the pod are water-soaked and
irregular, On infected plants, the pods contain either small, shoveled seeds or no seeds,
Grayish white mycelium might be seen on the infected seed. The dense canopy of plant
leads to excess soil moisture conservation and association with high nitrogenous
fertilizer aids disease development quicker and turns the plant grayish.

Control measures:
® Use of BGM tolerant cultivar (BARI Chola-3 and BARI Chola-9),
* Foliar application of a fungicile such as Bavistin 50WP (Carbendazim 50%), Secure
O00 WG (Fenamidone + Mancozeb) can also effectively reduce BOM development.

* Seed treatment with Provax-200 (0.25% wiw of dry seed gives good protection
against BGM disease in Bangladesh.

Foot rot
Foot rots disease caused by Sclerotivm rolfsii could induce §
up to 84% yield loss. The disease is favoured by high soil
moisture with high temperature (28-30"C), The infected
plants turn-slightly yellow followed by death and drying.
Affected young seedlings may collapse and older seedling
may dry without collapsing.

 
The fungus attacks the host at the collar region at soil level
and white fungal mycelia are visible with some ckickpea Foot rot disease
seed like selerotia at the base of the infected plants adjacent to soil. Infected plants
turn slightly yellow followed by death and drying. Affected young seedlings may
collapse and older seedlings may dry without collapsing,
Control measures:
* Seed treatment with Provax-200 (@) 2.5 g/ka seed.

® BAU Bio-fungicide alone or in combination with BINA bio-fertilizer reduces
incidence of the disease.

Fusarium wilt
Initial symptoms prior to willing were reported as sudden
dropping of terminal leaves and twigs, chlorosis of leaflets,
drapping of older leaves and overall drying of the plant.

Control measures:
® Use resistant cultivar (deshi-type and wild Cicer species). ‘
« Pre-sowing seed dressing with Provex/Bavestin, Symtoms of Fusariun wilt
® BAU Biofungicide alone or in combination with BINA biofertilizer reduces
incitence of the disease.

    
Major insects and control measures:
Chickpea is damaged by a number of insect pests, The major insect pests of this crop
are discussed.

70Pod borer (Meficeverpa arevgera Hubner)
The pod borer, Helicoverpaarmigere (Hubner) isa major and 7
serious pest in most of the chickpea growing areas in
Bangladesh. On an average of 30 to 40 per cent pods were
found to be damaged by pod borer with 400 kg/ha grain loss,
In favourable weather condition pod borer may cause 90-95
per cent pod damage. The females lays eggs singly or 2-6
eges ina cluster at night on the lower surface of the leaves,
flowers and pods of chickpea plant. The young caterpillar
skeletonizes the leaves, while grown up caterpillar bores into
the pods and feed the seeds inside. Larval period varies from
10 to 13 days and variable in colour. The general body colour
is brownish or pale green with lateral non broken stripe along
each side of the body and one distinct dorsal stripe. Pod borer
  
 
Control measures:
® Sowing of chickpea should be done within November 10 to November 30 and
optimum sowing time is November 15 for ensuring higher yield with less pod
borer damage,
Hand picking of larvae.

Perching (60-70 sticks/ha) can be used for sitting insectivorous birds.

Sequential release of eggs and larval parasitoids (Trichegramma and Bracen),
Intercropping in chickpea with companion crops like coriander, linseed, mustard,
wheat and safflower can reduce 45 to 60% pod damage by 1. armigera.

* Chickpea sown on 15 November and first spraying with Heficaverpa Nuclear
Polyhedrosis Virus (@) 500 LE/ha at 100% podding stage and second spray after 7
days interval with Cypermethrin fa) | mil of water could give the best protection
and ensure higher yield.

3.4 Harvesting and Seed Preservation
There are two ways to harvest the crop. One is, when almost all the pods turned
brown, the plants may be pulled out and another one is to cut at the ground level with
a sickle. Then drying in the field or on the threshing floor. When the plants and pods
would dry, then brittle with a stick, Often, cattle or power thresher are allowed to
trample on the plants to thresh the pods. Seeds should be cleaned by winnowing,
which is generally done by tossing the produce in the air with forks on a windy day,
Seed preservation
Chickpea should be properly stored because seed is vulnerable to heavy insect damage.
The seeds should be cleaned, dried thoroughly in sun and moisture content should be
lowered down to 8-9 %, Then seeds should be cooled and kept cither in sealed polythene
bags along with naphthalene balls covered by jute bags, tin containers or air tight earthen
pots in storcrooms, Finally, seed should be stored in dry and above ground place.

TIV. VEGETABLE CROPS
Vegetable fonns a group of specialized crops, They are important economically and
from a health point of view. They fit well in most farming systems as their maturity
period from planting to harvest is short, With the ever-increasing human population,
vegelables have played an important role in our national economy. Vegetables
provide maximum output and more income per unit area of land to small-scale
farmers, particularly when compared to cereals. A wide range of vegetables are grown
in Bangladesh. The summer vegetables are mostly indigenous whereas most of winter
vegelables are of European ongin. Production of vegetables in the cool season Is
hazard free, and blessed with a favourable climate. During summer, vegetable
production is affected by flood, cyclones, and other factors associated with high
temperature, humidity and rainfall. At present, vegetables are grown in about 4.52 lac
hectares of land with total production of 30.8 lac metric tones (BBS, 2011). Vegetable
production in Bangladesh is far below requirement. BARI and other organization
have developed a good number of HYV of different vegetable crops including
improved production technology. If farmers use these technologies then internal
requirement will be met up even we can export some vegetables abroad, The most
important vegetables are described below.

l. Tomato
Tomato (Solanum lycopersicum) is one of the most important vegetable of
Bangladesh, It is a good source of vitamin A and C as it provides antioxidant
elements (such as Lycopene) which prevent cancer. At present, i occupies 25
thousand hectares of land and produces about 2.35 lac metric tons with an average
yield of 9.39 Vha (BBS, 2011) which is very low compared to other tomate growing
countries. This poor yield could be increased through use of high yielding variety.
However, now-a-days farmers of Bangladesh is very much interested to grow high
yielding (OP and hybrid) variety for avoiding disease problem and to get carly
harvest (short duration), good quality fruit along with higher yield. But lacking of
good OPVhybnd tomato varieties and improved production technology are the main
constraints to increase national average yield,
1.1 Varieties
Bangladesh Agricultural Research Institute (BARI) has so far developed 21 tomato
varieties (13 OP and & Hybrid) for both winter and summer season, Besides, many
exotic and local OP and hybrid varieties are also grown in Bangladesh e.g, Mintoo
Super, Mintoo F,, Bahar, BINA Tomato, Pusa Ruby etc. The main features of the
important BARI released winter and summer tomate varictics grown in Bangladesh
are given below.Tomato (Winter)
High yielder, tolerant to Bacterial wilt (AW). Fruits are
Tomate-2 jround ond red in colour. Optimum planting time: mid
(Ratan) = |Octeber to mid November, Average frult weight: 55-)p.
(1986) Fruit yield: $5-0 vha. Duration: 120-130 days.

BARI Large cond fruit with attractive red flesh colour. Eqeh
Tomato-14 |frult welght; 90-95. Very good shelf life. Tolerant to
(24407) bacterial will, Prolonged harvesting period (45-00 days).
Recommended for early and late winter, Fruit yheld: 85
who. Duration: (40-150 days.

BARI Thick skin and elible flesh having very good shelf life,
Tomatoe-15 | Avroective red flesh colowr. Less seeded fniits. Oboword fruit
(2HHe) shape, Each frolt welght: 68-70p. Prults per plant: 40-33,
Resistant to TYLCY (Yellow Leaf Curl Virus) TSS more
than 4%. Fruit yields 30-85 divs, Duration: 130-140 days.
Large Nattened round fruit with attractive ned Nesh colour.
Very good shelf life. Average frult weight: 95-11, Fruit
per plant: 35-40 and weight: 3-4 kg. Resistant to bacterial
wilt and Yellow Leaf Curl Virus. Froit yields 5- (0) wha.
Duration: [70-150 days.

BARI Large round fruoit-with atinictive ned flesh colour Very good
Hybrid = [shelf life, Dodividial fruit welght: 90-95,. Resistant to
Tomate-— [bacterial wilt and Yellow Leal Curl Virus. Frott yield: ?0-
(2th) 95 vha. Dorathon: (70-180 days.
BARI Medium large round fruit with attractive colour, Thick
Hybrid = | pericarp with high shelf life. Very good shelf life. Number
Tomato-7 [of fruits per plant; 40-45, Average fruit weight; 70-74x,
Tolerance to TY LOY, Froit vheld: 90-95 tha, Duration: |)%
120-130 days. ih
 
Tamate (Summer)
Important Characteristics
Heat tolerant hybrid tomate vanety developed by
Hybrid =| Horticulture Research Centre (HRC), BARL Number of
Tomato-3 [fruits per plant: 33-10. Each fruit weight: 40g, Fruit
(2th) wield: 35-40 tho. Duration: 0-100 days.

BARI Heat tolerant hybrid tomatoe vanety. Number of frults per
Hybrid = | plant: 30-35. Each fruit weight: 50g. Good shelf life. It
Tomato-4 jean produce ceomomical yield without hormone application,
(2M) Froit yield: 40-45 tha. Duration: 100 days.

 
73Heal tolerant vanety. Alirmcnve ted coloured trit with)
thick flesh. Flattened round fruit shaped. Fruit size bigger
Tomate-& [than mher summer hybrid tomato, Sember of fruit per
(2001) plant: 22-25, Raised bed, plolythene shed required
protecting the crop from ram. Average froit weight: of-
652. Frodt-vield: 35-40 tha. Duration: 90-100 days.

 
1.2 Production Technology (winter tomata)
Climate, land and soil
The optimum temperature required for tomate is 20-25"C for better production. High
to medium high land is suitable for tomato cultivation. Tomato may be grown on a
wide range of soil from sandy to clay. The optimum soil PY required for tomate is
6.5-7.0. In-acidic soil, liming is required.

Seed rate
200-220 2 seed is required for one hectare of land.

Seed treatment
Provax 200 / Thiram 75% dust (@) 3g mixed with | ke seed should be done and shake
well before sowing.

Time of sowing
Seplember- October is the optimum time for seed sowing of winter tomato,
Seed bed preparation
Tomato seedlings are raised in the nursery bed. Seed bed should be 3 m in length and
| m in breadth. Seed beds are prepared with the mixture of sand, compost and soil.
Tomato seeds are sown in the line on a well prepared seed bed and lightly covered
with sail.

Transplanting method
After 7-10 days of sowing, the young seedlings are transplanted on the second bed at
a distance of 4 cm in both ways. The bed should be irrigated immediately after
transplanting. The seedling should be protected from strong sun and heavy rain.
Thirty-five days old seedlings should be transplanted in the main field at a spacing of
60 cm * 40cm (row * plant).

Land preparation
Tomato should be planted in well pulverized field with 4-5 times ploughing sfollowed
by laddering. Farmyard manure/compost and recommended dose of chemical
fertilizer are incorporated into.soil during final ploughing.

74Fertilizer dose and application methods
Cowdung: l0tha, Urea: 330 kg/ha, TSP: 450 ke/ha, MP: 250 kg/ha, Gypsum: 120
kg/ha, Boron: 2 kg/ha. Half of cowdung, half of TSP and entire amount of gypsum
and boron should be applied during land preparation. The remaining half of cowdung
and TSP should be applied during pit preparation before a week of planting. The
entire urca and MP are to be apphed in 3 .cqual installments of 21, 35 and 50 days
after transplanting.

Irrigation
As und when necessary,
1.3 Intercultural Operation
Training of tomate plants with the help of ropes is claimed to have resulted in carly
ripening, higher yield of better quality fruits and seeds, lesser disease incidence,
easier intercultural operation and harvesting. Priming side shoots and staking have
claimed to have higher yield, uniform and large fruit. Stacking with bamboo or
dhaincha (Sesbania sps) sticks beside each plant is to be given after transplanting.
Prunning of all side suckers exeept the sucker just below the first Mower cluster are to
be done. Stacking leads to higher yield of marketable fruits and facilitate
management operations such os imgation, interillage, pest control and harvesting.
Besides, weeding, loosening the soil and earthing up cic. should be done as and when
necessary. Mulching should be done after irrigation to ensure aeration.

Pest management
Major diseases and control measures:
Virus
Control measures:
* Virus is the major problem for tomato production so net (60 mesh)
protection during seedling stage 1s neeessary,
e Spray with Admire 200 SL/Imitaf 20 SL (@ 0.5 ml/litre of water at 7-10
days interval should be applied to control white fly after planting.

Late blight
Control measures:
* Spraying Ridomil gold or Mancozeb 2 g /litre water.
« Remove infested plant.

Early blight
Control measures:
* Spraying Rovral 2 g/litre water at 15 days interval,
e Use resistant variety,
TSBacterial wilt
Control measures:
s §«Lse resistant variety,
* The land should be kept clean and well drained.

Major insects and control measures:
Tomate fruit worm
Control measures:
* Sanitation with clean cultivation.
* Sex pheromone based control measure.
e During severe infestation, spraying of Cypenmethrin 10 EC f@) | ml/litre
or Fenvalerate 20 EC (a) 0.5 ml/litre of water at 15 days interval should be
applied,
Common cutworm/Prodenia caterpillar
Control measures:
e Practice [PM (Picking egg mass and Prodenia caterpillar) two times during
total cropping penod.
Lise of sex pheromone trap.
* Spray Cypermethrin (@) 1.5 ml/l or Spinosad (Tracer 45 SC (@) 0.5 ml!) of
water at 15 days interval,
Leal miner
Control measures:
« Hand picking of infested leaves.
® Use of yellow trap.
« Apply Neem oil + trix 2-3 times fa! 5 ml] of water at 7-10 days interval.

1.4 Harvesting and Seed preservation
Seed harvesting: Seed fruits are allowed to nipen to maturity on the plant. Only
complete coloured and matured seed fruits are harvested. The seed yield of tomato is
145 kg/ha,
Seed preservation: Slice the selected fruits and separate the seeds then keep it 20"-
21%C temperature and fermented for 24-36 hours. Wash the seeds properly afier
fermentation. After washing, dry the seeds properly and reduce moisture below 8%,
Sceds should be preserved in air ight containers with dry and cool temperature,
Production Technology (summer tomato)
Climate, land and Soil
The most important limiting factor of summer tomate cultivation during miny-
summer season (March-October) is the high min and high temperature when the
T6temperature ranges fram 25-35°C even as high as 40°C in Bangladesh. On an average
200 mm of rainfall per annum falls on 80% of the land during this period. The rainy-
stimimer scason is the most difficult season for cultivation, as it corresponds to a high
temperature period and crops are often damaged by heavy rain, high temperature and
pest, High to medium land is required for tomato cultivation. Tomato may be grown
ena wide range of soil from sandy to clay. The optimum sail PY of summer tomato
should be 6,5-7.0,
Tunnel preparation
Preparation of raised beds and polyethylene tunnel
The raised bed planting is beneficial and commonly
adopted in low land tropics and high rainfall areas or
for rainy season cropping. Generally, wider beds in
loamy and heavy soils while narrower beds in
lighter soils are recommended.

During summer particularly in rainy season
transparent poly tunnel is to be built on the raised
beds to protect the plants. The raised beds height 1s
to be maintained at 30 cm and width of two beds
should be 2.30 em (including 30 em wide drainage ©
channel in the middle point) along with a convenient
length for each are to be arranged for making one
tunnel. In this case tunnel height should be 120 em
on both sides and 180 cm in the middle. Between
two tunnels there must be about 75 cm wide Inside dhe busimel
drainage channel to facilitate irrigation or drainage
of water and for other operations.

 
Suminer tamale production uniker pinnel
a
   
The seed rate and offer cultural operations, pest managements, and harvesting and
Seed preservation are sane as winter tomate cultivation,
72. Brinjal
Brinjal belongs to the family Solanaceae and as known under the botanical name
Salanun meclongena. Brinjal is one of the important winter and summer vegetables
which is grown extensively in Bangladesh. In Brinjal, a large variation of plant types,
fruit colour, shape and size are available.. Al present, it occupies 46.57 thousand
hectares of land and produces about 3.40 lac metric tons (BBS, 2011).

2.1 Varieties
Bangladesh Agricultural Research Institute (BARI) has developed 12 brinjal varieties
(8 OP and 4 Hybrid) for winter and summer season which produce seeds under local
climatic condition, Some popular local varieties-Singhnath, Islampun, Khatkhotia,
Dohazari etc. are cultivated widely in Bangladesh, The main features of the important
BARI released varieties are given below:
This is the most popular and attmetive brinjal variety, Iisa
Begun-3 (F1) | winter vegetable crop. Fruit shape is oblong with shining
(Shuktara) |blackish purple colour, has export potential, Number of
(1992) fruits per plant: 70-80. Average frult welght: 33-032.
Fruit yield: 63 tha. Danration; 130-180 days.

Oblong shaped fruits with shiny blackish purple colour.
Average fruit number per plant: 70-80. Single fruit
Welght: 33-632. Optimum planting thme: Mid August to
November. Fruit yield: 60-70 wha. Duration: 140-170
hayes,
Fruiis are long evlindncal and boght shiny purple.
Sombers of fruits per plant: 20-25 Each fruit weight:
70-80g. Prolific bearer during summer miny season. Erect |
plant with purplish light foliage covernge, Resistant to})
bacterial wilt and heat tolenml. Recommended for round |
the vear Fruit vield: 40-45 vho, Duration: 120 days 2
Long evlinderical shaped fruit. Attmective shine deep purple
fruits skin colour, Heat tolerant line suitable for growing
round the veor Average cach fruit weight: (00-1 10p.
Moderately resistant to bacteral wilt, aphid, soil nematodes
ond Jossid. Fruit yield: 55 ho (winter) and 35 who
(summer), Duration: 125-130 dws.
BARI Intermediate growth ‘habit. | Long cylindrical deep purple
Hybrid frie, Average fruit number per plant: 60-70 and Each
Bepun-3 = [fruit weight: 90-D10g. Fruit can be harvested in 55-65
(2001) days. Suliable for cultivation in rabi season, Frult vleld:
65-70 vha, Duration: 140 -150 dings.

 
78Dwart type plant. Plant height: 30 em. Light green oval
shaped fruit. Tolerant to bacterial will, Eneh fruit welght:
100-110¢, Average somber of fruits per plant; 2-35,
Suttuble for cultivation in raobi season, Fruit can be
harvested in 55-65 days. Froit yield: 35-60 wha. Duration:
140 -150 days.

 
2.2 Production Technology
Climate, land and soil
Long and wann growing season is desirable for successful brinjal production, Cool
night and short summers are unfavorable to iis satisfactory growth and development.
The optimum temperature for its better growth is 15"-17°C, It can be grown on all
types of soils from light to heavy soil. Higher yield may be oblained when soil
becomes clay loam or silt. lt does not grow well on a highly acidic soil. The plants
grow well when soil P" ranges from 45.5 to 6.5,
Seed rate
About 120-1 50g seed is required for one hectare of land.

Seed treatment
Healthy seedling is the pre-condition of a good crop. To get healthy seedlings, the
seeds should be treated before sowing with Provax 200 (@) 2.5 p/ke of seed. Then the
seeds should be sown densely ina primary seedbed.

Time of sowing
Mid August-September for winter and mid February-March for summer are the
optimum times for seed sowing,
Seedbed preparation
Nursery bed is to be made 15-20 em high with fine prepared soil mixed with 3-4 ke
well rotted cow dung/bed (3m-*). Usually the soil mixture for the bed should have one
part soil, one part sand and one part compost. The standard size of the bed should be
1.0m x 3.0 m chich facilitates watering, weeding, mulching and after care, Make
narrow lines of 3-4 cm deep and 4 cm apart and sow the seeds continuously in lines
and cover with fine soil and water lightly, Seeds will germinate within 3-4 days.
Protect the seedbed from direct sun and rain. The nursery beds should be prepared in
the same way as primary beds with an addition of 30g¢ urea, l5g¢ MP and 13g
TSP/bed, Nursery bed should be prepared 3-5 days before transplanting of seedlings
79from pomary bed. After one week of emergence, uproot the seedlings and transplant
immediately in the nursery beds at a spacing of 4 cm x 4 cm, and provide light
Imigation, protect the seedlings from direct sun and rain. Weeding and irrigation
should be given when necessary.

Transplanting method
Thirty to thirty five day old seedlings should be transplanted having 5-6 true leaves.
Before uprooting the seedling from seedbed, water the seedbed lightly to minimize
root damage. Transplanting in the late afternoon is suggested to allow the seedlings to
recover overnight. Under large-scale cultivation, watering by hand and shading are
laborious and costly. Thus immediate post-transplanting imation is the best method
of crop establishment, Missing hill should be filled up with spare seedlings within 10
days afier planting.

Land preparation
Land should be deeply ploughed, well pulverized and weed free, After final
preparation of land, prepare 70-80 em wide and 15 cm high bed, In between two beds
40-50 cm wide canal maintained which help in irrigating the crop as well as in
draming of water. On the bed, one row should be made and transplant the seedlings
on the rows at a spacing of 70-80 cm.

Fertilizer dose and application method
Brinjal being a long duration crop requires a good amount of manures and fertilizers.
The land is fertilized with cowdung, Urea, TSP and MP (a! 10 ton, 375 kg, 150 kg
and 250 kg/ha, respectively. The entire amount of cowdung, TSP and half of MP
should be applied during land preparation. The remaining half of MP and entire
amount of urea are tobe applied in three equal installments at 20, 40 and 60 days
after transplanting.

Irrigation
Irrigation is essential for brinjal cultivation in regions where there is litte or no rain
during the growing season. Brinjal being a shallow rooted crop needs irrigation al
frequent intervals. Irrigation should be given according to local requirements.
However, the field should be irrigated every 10-12 days during the winter followed
by mulching to facilitate good acration.

2.3 Intercultural Operation
Shallow hocing should be done in order to remove the weeds and loose the soil for
better acration to facilitate better root growth.Pest management
Major insects and control measures:
Brinjal shoot and fruit borer (BSFB) is the most destructive insects of brinjal.

Control measures:
® Sanitation and pheromone trap is effective,
« Sequential release of Trichogrimma f@) 1g (25,000) and Brecon bebetor (@ Tbunker
(800-1200) or of spraying Cypermethrin (@ 1.5 ml/l or Spinosad (@) 0.5 ml/l of
water at 14 days interval,
* Spray Tracer @ 0.5 ml/l water is effective to control cut worm or irrigation with
kerosene oil (5-7 litres kerosene / ha) or Dursban / Pyriphos 20 EC (@ at 5.0 ml /
litre of water should be sprayed on the soil around the seedling during evening,
2.4 Harvesting and Seed preservation
Edible purpose: Brinjal can be harvested atter 2-3 months of seedling transplanting.
Frequent harvest can be done after 5-7 days intervals with sharp knife, The fruit yield
may range from 30 to 70 wha depending on variety.

Quality Seed production: The fruits are usually hand picked at ripen stage. Seeds
should be collected from first or second tier fruiis as those have a higher seed weight
and germination rate than seeds collected from fruits beyond the second tier, There are
two basic methods used for the extraction of brinjal seeds: (1) wet extraction and (ii)
dry extraction. The wet extraction is favoured for large scale seed production while
the dry extraction is for small scale.

In wet extraction, the harvested fruits are stored for 5-7 days in room temperate until
they become soft. This allows the seeds to mature fully. The fruits are crushed or cut
into thin slices. These are then softened by soaking tll the seeds are separated from
the pulp. Since the brinjal fruit pulp is relatively dry, it requires extra water during
and after crushing and would be allowed to stand overnight to facilitate sced
separation from the flesh.

In dry extraction, the npen fruits are harvested and dried in the sun until they shrivel.
During drying of purple and purple black fruits the skin colour turns to coppery
brown. The fruits are then hand beaten to extract the seed. This method is used for
small-scale seed extraction.

Seed yield
The variation in seed yield is due to environmental factors, crop management
practices and varicties. The average seed yield is 200-300) kp/ha,
|3. Cabbage
Cabbage (#rassica oferaeca var. capitata L.) is one of the most imporlant winter
vegetables which is grown extensively in Bangladesh, It is an introduced vegetable
crop, but it has adapted itself well and is grown all over the country. In Bangladesh,
the total area and production of cabbave is 15.79 hectares of land and 2.07 lac metric
tons, respectively (BBS, 2011). It is rich in vitamin A, B and C. It also contains
phosphorus, polassium, calcium, sodium and iron.

3.1) Varieties
Most of the varieties under cultivation in Bangladesh are hybrids and are imported
from Japan, China and Europe. However, Bangladesh Agricultural Research Institute
(BARI) has developed two tropical open-pollinated cabbage varictics which produce
seeds under local climatic condition. A brief discussion of BARI developed varieties
and their important characteristics are given below:
Name of
Varieties: Important Characteristics Crop
(Vear of Release
BARI lt is a tropical open-pollinated cabbage variety having
Bandha ability i produce abundant seeds under local climatic
kepi-1 condition, Head is compact and medium sie (2.5ke/ha),
(Provati) |Head become horvestuble offer 30) days of inmsplanting.
(198) This vanety is recommended for winter season crop, Head
¥ield: 30-00 tha. Produces seed locally and seed yield:
0-700 ke/ho. Buration: 110-120 chive 1 is cultivated all!=
ower Bangladesh.

BARI Open-pollinated tropical cabbage variety. Head is compact
Bandha = jand fat. It becomes harvestable from TOO days: from
kopi-2 transplanting. Produces seeds locally and seed yield is
(Agradut) jabouwt 00-650 ke/ha. Average head weight: 2.0-2,5 ky.

(108) Head yield: 63-70 who. Duration: 120-120 days. It is also
cultivated all over Botigladesh,
 
The cabbage varicties are categorized in three groups considering planting time.

Early planting - Topmost, K-K cross, K-Y¥ cross, BARI Bandhakopi-1 (Provati),
BARI Bandhakopi- 2 (Agrodut).

Mid-season planting — K-K cross, K-Y cross, Green Express, Topmost,
Late planting- Atlas-70, K-K cross, K-Y cross, Topmost.

3.2 Production Technology
Climate, land and soil
lt is a-cool season crop which thrives best ina relatively cool moist climate. It can
82withstand extreme cold comparatively better than cauliflower, The optimum
iemperature for its better growth is 15°-20°C. It may be grown on all types of soils
from light to heavy soil, However: higher yield may be obtained in clay loam or silt
soils. It does not grow well on a highly acidic soil but plants grow well within P
ranging from $.5 to 6,5,
Seed rate
About 350-400 ¢ seeds is required for one hectare of land. Twenty nursery beds (1 m
x 3m) are required to grow the seedlings for one hectare of land.

Seed treatment
To have healthy seedling, the seeds should be treated before sowing with Provax
200) 2.5 2/ke of seed. Then the seeds should be sown densely in a primary seedbed.

Time of sowing
For early planting, seeds should be sown in August, for mid-season planting in
September and for late planting in November,
Seedbed preparation
The primary seedbed should be well- pulvenzed and mixed with 3-4 ke well-rotted
cowdung/bed (3m), Make narrow lines of 1-1.5 cm deep and 4 cm apart and sow the
seeds continuously in lines and cover with fine soil and water lightly. Seeds are made
to germinate within 3-4 days. Protect the seedbed from direct sun and mun. The
nursery beds should be prepared in the same way as primary beds with an addition of
30g Urea, 15¢ MP and l5¢ TSP/bed. Nursery bed should be prepared 3-5 days before
transplanting of seedlings from primary bed. After one week of emergence, uproot the
seedlings and transplant immediately in the nursery bed at a spacing of 4 cm x 4 cm,
and provide light irrigation, protect the seedlings from direct sun and mun. Weeding
and irrigation should be done when necessary.

Land preparation
Land should be deeply ploughed, well pulverized and weed free. Affer final
preparation of land, prepare | m wide and 15 em high raised bed. In between two
beds 30 em wide canals which help in irrigation of crops and drain out of water.

Transplanting method
Thirty to 35 day old seedlings should be transplanted having 3-6 true leaves. Irrigate
the seedbed lightly to minimize root damage before uprooting the seedling from
seedbed. On the bed, two rows 60 cm apart should be made and transplant the
seedlings on the rows at a spacing of 45 cm to 60 cm (depending on the variety).
Transplanting in the late afternoon is suggested to allow the seedlings to recover
during night. Then immediate post-transplanting irrigation is the best method of crop
establishment, Missing hill should be filled up with spare good seedlings within 10
days after planting.

83Fertilizer dose and application method
Cabbage being a heavy feeder, responds well to the fertilizer application. BARI
recommended 5-10 tons cow-dung‘compost, 300-350 ke Urea, 200-250 ke TSP and
250-300 kg MP, 100 kg Gypsum, 4 kg 2nO, 3 kz Sodium molybdate and 10-15 kg
Borax per hectare. The entire quantity of cowdung/compost, TSP, Gypsum, 2nQ,
Sodium molybdate, Borax and half of the MP are to be applied during final land
preparation. The entire quantity of urea and the rest of MP should be applied as top
dressing in three equal installments, It is recommended that one additional dose of
Urea and MP (100 kg/ha each) is applied during bolting stage for seed production,
Irrigation
Irrigation is given according to the crop requirements and climatic condition. A crap
after transplanting may need imigation twice a week and later once a week. Heavy
irrigation is avoided at the time of marketable maturity of heads to save the heads
from splitting. Adequate moisture supply during flowering and seed development are
necessary to obtain high seed yield.

3.3 Intercultural Operation
Shallow hocing should be done in order to remove the weeds and loose the soil for
better acration to facilitate better root growth.

Pest management
Major insects and control measures:
Diamond back meth
Control measures:
* Removal and destruction of all the remnants, stubbles debris ete after the harvest of
crop and plough the fields.

® Application of [FM approach in field (Picking of the egg masses and larvae of
diamond back moth and prodenia caterpillar).

® Sequential release of Thchogrammia (@) | 2 (25,000) and Bracon hebetor (@ bunker
(800-1 2000),
® Spray Cypermethrin (@! 1.5 m/l or Spinosad (@) 0.5ml/l of water at 15 days interval,
Butterfly
Control measures:
® Hand picking and mechanical destruction of caterpillars at carly stage of attack
might reduce population of pest.

* In case of severe infestation spraying with Quinalphos (Kinalux, Debiquine 25 EC
fa) 1.5 m/l of water.Common cutworm/ Prodenia caterpillar
Control measures:
® Practice IPM (Picking of the egg mass and Prodenia caterpillar) two times during
total cropping period,
* Use of sex pheromone trap.

* Spray Cypermethrin (@) 1.5 m/l or Spinosad (@ 0.5 mill of water at 13 days interval.

Aphids
Control measures:
Hand picking at initial stage.

Conservation of natural enemies like lady bind beetle and syrphid fly.
Spray soap water fa) 5 g2/l of water 2-3 times at 7-10 days interval.
Apply Neem oil + trix 2-3 times (@) 5 mill of water at 7-10 days interval.

Major diseases and control measures:
Alternaria leaf spot
Control measures:
® Seed treatment with Provax 200 (@! 3 2/ky of seed.
* Foliar spraying with Rubral (2 ml/1 litre of water).

Cercospora Leaf spot
Control measures:
* Seed treatment with Provax 200 (a) 3 g/kg of seed,
* Foliar spray of Bavistin or Knowin (@) 2 ke/litre of water
3.4 Harvesting and Seed preservation
Cabbage heads become harvestable within 90-120 days of seeding. Heads should be
harvested when they attain the full size and compactness depending on the vanity.
The yield may range from 75 to 100 wha. The early varieties give lower yield than mid
and late varieties, However, the yield differs with the season, variely and location.

Seed harvest and preservation:
Harvesting can be done when seed pods are brown. Too ripe pods dehisce, Sced
should not crash or split when rubbed between the hands. The harvesting may be
done in two ways. Generally, the carly plants are harvested first, when the pod colour
of about 60 to 70 percent of the pods tum brown and the rest of the crop changes toa
yellowish brown. After harvesting it is piled up for curing, After 4 to 4 days it is
turned up side down and allowed to cure for another four to five days in the same
way. It is then threshed with sticks and sifted with hand sifters. After thorough drying
of seed in partial sun (upto 7 percent moisture content) it is cleaned and stored.

a5
